Abstract Brain–computer interface research can inspire closed-loop neuromodulation therapies, promising spatiotemporal precision for the treatment of brain disorders. Decoding dynamic patient states from brain signals with machine learning is required to leverage this precision, but a standardized framework for invasive brain signal decoding from neural implants does not exist. Here we develop a platform that integrates brain signal decoding with magnetic resonance imaging connectomics and demonstrate its use across 123 h of invasively recorded brain data from 73 neurosurgical patients treated with brain implants for movement disorders, depression and epilepsy. We introduce connectomics-informed movement decoders that generalize across cohorts with Parkinson’s disease and epilepsy from the United States, Europe and China. We reveal network targets for emotion decoding in left prefrontal and cingulate circuits in deep brain stimulation patients with major depression. Finally, we showcase opportunities to improve seizure detection in responsive neurostimulation for epilepsy. Our study highlights the clinical use of brain signal decoding for deep brain stimulation and provides methods that allow for rapid, high-accuracy decoding for precision medicine approaches that can dynamically adapt neurotherapies in response to the individual needs of patients. Similar content being viewed by others Main Neuromodulation therapies like deep brain stimulation (DBS) are evolving from their initial designs into advanced computer-powered neurotechnologies. Innovations in neural engineering now allow combining the temporal precision of closed-loop neuromodulation with accurate decoding of patient states achieved through methodologies introduced by brain–computer interface (BCI) research. This provides the foundation for neurotherapies that can adapt therapy to the individual situation and symptoms that patients are facing. Closed-loop therapies have begun to automatize therapeutic adjustment based on signals recorded directly from the brain and body of patients1,2,3,4,5, with millisecond precision. For this, brain activity signals from intracranial electroencephalography (iEEG) electrodes can be transformed into input features for machine-learning-based therapeutic control policies that can adapt therapy in real-time. Such strategies hold potential to improve the quality of lives of millions of patients with brain disorders, by reacting precisely and continuously to dynamic brain states. However, to date only a few studies have investigated the clinical use of machine-learning-based brain signal decoding, especially in the field of invasive neuromodulation. To realize the full potential of such neurotechnological approaches, robust evaluation and implementation of machine learning models must be enabled. Three major obstacles, however, stand in the way. First, machine learning can capitalize on large datasets, but current brain signal-decoding approaches still commonly rely on short data segments in individual patients. This reliance is impractical and costly for broad clinical adoption and substantially limits the use of complex models for generalizable performance. Second, current advances in basic neuroscience have revealed the presence of complex brain signal features such as waveform shape and aperiodic activity as markers of synaptic synchrony and balance of excitatory and inhibitory modulation6,7, but standardized methods to extract them for machine learning applications are lacking. Finally, human behaviour is encoded in whole brain circuit interactions, but current brain signal-decoding solutions often fail to account for the underlying brain networks that give rise to the recorded signals8. To overcome these roadblocks, we developed a modularized open-source methods pipeline for invasive brain signal decoding in neurotechnology, bridging the gap between closed-loop neuromodulation and clinical BCI approaches. In this Article, we aimed to highlight the clinical use of brain signal-decoding advances in a large cohort of patients across thousands of recording sources from invasive brain implants within three key areas of clinical neurotechnology innovation: movement disorders, psychiatry and epilepsy. We formalize and describe the methodology to achieve those advances in an open-source python software platform called py_neuromodulation, and we illustrate how the two biggest innovations in DBS research of the past decade, namely, DBS connectomics and adaptive DBS, can be combined to extend their clinical use. Results Invasive neurophysiology processing for brain signal decoding We developed an open, integrative and modularized platform (Fig. 1) for standardized and reproducible implementation of machine-learning-based brain signal-decoding algorithms called py_neuromodulation9. The modularized feature estimation chains include a versatile set of state-of-the-art signal processing algorithms. In brief, oscillatory dynamics, waveform shape, interregional coherence6,7,10,11 and more can be extracted through the modular architecture which further allows for flexible extension for more advanced feature estimation metrics, such as direction of information flow with Granger causality or phase amplitude coupling12 (see Supplementary Table 1 for an extensive feature list). A key problem for invasive brain signal decoding is the individualized localization of brain implants across patients, which considerably complicates the development of large-scale models that generalize across patients. To address this, we developed dedicated approaches for across-patient decoding based on advanced machine learning algorithms that can account for variability in electrode localization. In the following, we highlight the use of this platform across three invasive brain stimulation use cases. Generalizable models for movement decoding with online validation For the treatment of movement disorders, the decoding of volitional and pathological motor output has the potential to provide critical information for therapeutic adjustment for different diseases such as Parkinson’s disease or essential tremor1,4. Here, we evaluate electrocorticography (ECoG)-based movement decoding as a two-class classification problem (rest versus movement present) without individual training (56 patients, 1,480 channels, mean age: 50.6 ± 17.8 years, 24 women) from three independent Parkinson’s disease (n = 38; Berlin/Pittsburgh/Beijing) and one epilepsy cohorts (n = 18 from Washington13) performing different upper limb movements (Fig. 2a and Supplementary Tables 2 and 3). In patients with Parkinson’s disease, ECoG strips were introduced through DBS burr holes14 (Extended Data Fig. 1). In a sub-cohort of six patients (Berlin), recordings were repeated during clinically effective subthalamic nucleus (STN)-DBS. First, patient-specific movement classification performances based on ECoG signals were analysed. We computed fast Fourier transform (FFT) features from streamed raw data batches in eight frequency bands from 4 to 400 Hz in segments of 1,000 ms continuously updated at 10 Hz leading to a temporal resolution of 100 ms with 90% overlap. All features were z-score normalized across the past 30 s and clipped at ±3 for artefact mitigation. Feature contributions were observed in each frequency band but the highest importance was identified in the theta, high beta and high gamma frequency bands (Extended Data Fig. 2). Normalization was performed to ensure comparable feature values across study participants. We trained ridge-regularized logistic regression classifiers and evaluated their performance using the balanced accuracy metric with 3-fold cross-validation on consecutive data segments, yielding sample-wise performances indicating the presence or absence of movement at 100 ms resolution. Sample-wise performances were concatenated to establish a more coarse metric that allowed for detection of individual movement entities, termed movement detection rate and defined as 300 ms of consecutive movement classification. Performance was above 0.5 chance level in every participant, with an average balanced accuracy of 0.8/0.98 ± 0.07/0.04 for single-sample/movement detection in the best channel per participant (P < 0.05, across participant one-sample permutation test), spatially peaking in sensorimotor cortex indicative of a potential interplay of motor and sensory information predictive for movement output (Fig. 2b–d). We could identify two key factors associated with relatively lower performances that will be crucial to account for in future clinical applications: disease severity and therapeutic DBS. First, we show that decoding performance is negatively correlated with clinical symptom severity in patients with Parkinson’s disease, as measured with Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale Part III (UPDRS-III) (Spearman’s rho = −0.36; P = 0.02) (Fig. 2e). We reported a similar result earlier for the Pittsburgh cohort11 and therefore repeated the analysis for Berlin and Beijing alone, excluding all previously reported data, and could empirically reproduce the negative correlation across new cohorts (rho = −0.43, P = 0.03). We may speculate that neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s disease may impact neural encoding of movement, which may also impede machine-learning-based decoding performance. Next and equally important, we show that continuous therapeutic electrical stimulation (130 Hz STN-DBS) can significantly deteriorate sample-wise decoding in some but not all patients and that models trained separately for OFF and ON stimulation conditions outperform models trained on either condition alone. It is worth noting that processing steps to mitigate DBS artefacts including bandpass filtering and period-based DBS artefact removal did not improve, but instead aggravated, this deterioration (Extended Data Fig. 3). Nevertheless, movement detection remained acceptable with 0.88 ± 0.17 movement detection rate (0.79 ± 0.13 balanced accuracy) across movements even during high-frequency DBS (Fig. 2f,g). Our results highlight the necessity to account for therapies and disease-related brain state changes in clinical BCI. The more serious limitation of the above-mentioned results is the dependence on patient individual training. For a real-world clinical application, this means that every implant would need to undergo tedious model training sessions, which could be a burden to both patients and medical staff and may hinder a broad clinical adoption. To address this critical limitation, we explored three computational approaches that do not depend on patient individual training while accounting for individual differences in ECoG strip location (Extended Data Figs. 1 and 4). In a first approach, the data were spatially extrapolated to a manually defined 38-point cortical surface grid, similar to a previous study15 (Fig. 2h). The disadvantage of this however, is (a) that extrapolation leads to inaccuracy in spatial estimation and (b) large amounts of data would be required to train a grid of the whole brain, which limits the application to cohorts with very similar electrode locations. To overcome these shortcomings, we have developed a connectomic approach for across-patient decoding that optimally accounts for the specific recording localization while being generalizable across the whole brain (Extended Data Fig. 5). It builds on functional or structural connectivity fingerprints extracted from brain signal recording locations in normative space. In brief, voxel-wise correlations between decoding performance and whole-brain connectivity maps seeded from channel MNI (Montreal Neurological Institute) coordinates were calculated to identify an optimal connectomic template fingerprint for movement decoding (so-called connectomic decoding network map) across all participants (Fig. 2i). This allows for an optimized a priori channel selection without training, by identifying the individual recording channel that has most network overlap with the optimal template. Finally, we have transformed neural features from the selected channel into a lower-dimensional embedding16. For this, a five-layer convolutional neural network with a temporal filter length of 1 s was trained using the InfoNCE (Noise-Contrastive Estimation) contrastive loss function17. The resulting embeddings showed exceptionally high consistency across participants as investigated with linear identifiability (Fig. 2j,k). All three approaches reached significant above 0.5 chance balanced accuracy (permutation test) and movement detection metrics (Table 1, Fig. 2l,m and Supplementary Tables 4 and 5) for cross-validation without patient individual training within and across cohorts and even leaving entire cohorts out. This indicates high generalizability across movement types, neurological disorders, recording set-ups and individual implant trajectories. In addition to the conceptual advantage to account for specific recording location and underlying brain network affiliation, the connectomic approach with contrastive learning (CEBRA) outperformed the other two methods for each cross-validation approach in sample-wise balanced accuracy (see Table 1 for performances and Supplementary Table 6 for statistics; paired permutation test leave-one-participant-out validation within cohort CEBRA versus grid points: P = 0.0038, CEBRA versus connectomics: P = 0.0027; leave-one-participant-out validation across cohorts CEBRA versus grid points: P < 10−5, CEBRA versus connectomics P = 0.0004; leave-one-cohort-out CEBRA versus grid points: P < 10−5, CEBRA versus connectomics: P = 0.0008). We further tested for the time improvement of decoding without patient individual training compared to individual training. Here, the cumulative individual training time reached 3 h 47 min to reach leave-one-participant-out performance across patients (Fig. 2n). For a subset of those patients (n = 8) the individual training performance could not reach the across-patient decoding performance (Fig. 2o). Finally, after successfully training across patient models offline, we validated the approach prospectively in two newly recruited patients with Parkinson’s disease in Berlin (Supplementary Videos 1 and 2). For patient 1, pretrained patient-naive models outperformed individually trained models within the same recording session, with best performance of the model trained on all patients from the Berlin cohort (sample-wise balanced accuracy, 0.71; movement detection rate, 0.97), with slightly lower performances for a model trained on the patient individual data within the same session (45 movements; ~9 min recording; sample-wise balanced accuracy, 0.67; movement detection rate, 0.97) (Fig. 2p). As the next step, to demonstrate the full automatized brain signal-decoding-based closed-loop neuromodulation capabilities of our platform, we recruited a new patient for a closed-loop neurostimulation paradigm. Here, we used our pretrained model without any calibration or individual training to trigger subthalamic high-frequency stimulation when movement was detected. The decoding performance remained stable (Fig. 2q; with stimulation-based sample-wise balanced accuracy, 0.66; rate of movements stimulated with at least 300 ms, 0.91), despite the presence of intermittent closed-loop DBS. Decoding emotions in major depression Invasive brain signal decoding has clinical use beyond movement decoding. In the following we highlight the clinical potential of py_neuromodulation for brain circuit discovery in the neuropsychiatric domain. In the future, closed-loop therapies for affective disorders may adapt neuromodulation to concurrent mood or may support patients in the valuation of perceived emotion18,19. Here, we used brain signal-decoding pipeline to investigate optimal circuits, target features and computational approaches to decode perceived emotion from the primary DBS target for major depressive disorder, the subgenual cingulate cortex (SCC). Machine learning decoders were trained on local field potential signals from the DBS electrodes in the SCC in eight patients undergoing DBS for treatment-resistant major depressive disorder as part of a clinical trial (mean age, 48 ± 11.4 years, 4 women; Supplementary Table 7; ClinicalTrials.gov registration number, NCT00531726). Neurophysiological recordings were conducted extraoperatively while DBS leads were externalized and acquired while patients participated in a visual emotion task (Fig. 3a). Visual stimuli included pleasant, unpleasant and neutral stimuli from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS) database (for further information, see ref. 20) and were presented for a duration of 1 s with an inter-stimulus interval of 6–8 s. We used py_neuromodulation to estimate a unique and novel feature set that included temporal waveform features, such as discharge prominence, sharpness, decay and rise time, and peak and trough intervals in addition to traditional oscillatory FFT features. Logistic regression classifiers were trained to distinguish emotional valences using samples during stimulus presentation and cross-validated within patients as described above (Fig. 3b). Above-chance performance was obtained in all patients, with performance rising at 150 ms and peaking at 600 ms post-stimulus onset (Fig. 3c). Sample-wise performances were above 0.5 chance level for all classifications (balanced accuracy 0.62 ± 0.05; neutral versus pleasant, 0.64 ± 0.07; neutral versus unpleasant performances, 0.6 ± 0.03; pleasant versus unpleasant, 0.63 ± 0.01) (all P < 0.05 for one-sample permutation tests; Fig. 3d). Decoding performance was driven by oscillations including high-frequency (200–400 Hz) activity (HFA), low- (60–90 Hz) and high-gamma (90–200 Hz) activity, followed by waveform shape features including rise time and prominence (Fig. 3e). To investigate a potential relationship with clinical scores, we correlated decoding performances from the most predictive channel contrasting neutral versus positive/negative per patient with Beck’s Depression Inventory (BDI) at the time of recording and after 6 months of chronic DBS. Decoding performance correlated with DBS-induced improvement in BDI scores (rho = 0.79, P = 0.01), but concurrent symptom severity did not reflect in lower decoding performances (Fig. 3f). The correlation could potentially be driven by differences in electrode localization stemming from natural variance in surgical targeting rather than by disease-related factors, which inspired us to explore the underlying whole-brain networks. To this end, we used both diffusion magnetic resonance imaging (dMRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) connectomics as above and an additional fibre-filtering approach recently introduced in the context of DBS for obsessive–compulsive disorder21,22. In all cases, connectivity fingerprints seeded from local field potential (LFP) channel locations were correlated with channel-specific decoder test-set performance by vectorizing or reducing spatial information and deriving similarity estimates to the optimal fingerprint (Extended Data Fig. 6). The identified fibre tracts and whole-brain dMRI fingerprints were predictive of decoding performance and robust to leave-one-channel-out validation (Extended Data Fig. 7; fibre-filtering rho = 0.48, P < 10−5, whole-brain dMRI fingerprint: rho = 0.38, P = 0.002) and leave-one-participant-out cross-validation (fibre-filtering rho = 0.46, P < 10−5, whole-brain dMRI fingerprint: rho = 0.46, P < 10−5). Functional connectivity was robust to leave-one-channel-out validation (rho = 0.39, P = 0.001) but not leave-one-participant-out validation (P > 0.05). A consistent left lateralized prefrontal network emerged across modalities that has direct overlap with network targets for the treatment of depression for transcranial magnetic stimulation and has relevant similarity with networks associated with mood change23, alleviation of depression and affective changes with subthalamic DBS in Parkinson’s disease24,25 (Fig. 3g,h and Extended Data Fig. 6). In the future, emotion decoding may become relevant to adapt neurostimulation control and select optimal targets from electrophysiological biomarkers and connectomics5,26,27. Optimization of seizure detection parameters in epilepsy Responsive neurostimulation (RNS; Neuropace) is a closed-loop stimulation device for treatment of medication-resistant epilepsy28. The device comprises a cranially mounted battery and processor connected to two electrodes which can be either an ECoG strip or a stereoencephalography depth electrode in proximity to the putative seizure focus. RNS promises a superior reduction in the number of disabling seizures by processing LFP signals using programmable detectors of seizure (that, is ictal) states to deliver temporally targeted stimulation. However, mechanisms of closed-loop stimulation for epilepsy are not well understood. For some patients, this therapy can be life changing with complete remission of seizures, while for others the therapeutic success remains below expectations2. A key differentiating feature versus open loop therapies is the ability to target stimulation to specific neurophysiologic states (such as ictal, inter-ictal or quiescent) via physician-selected detection parameter settings. Defining appropriate settings from this vast parameter space is a largely manual process that has potential for important acceleration through data-driven methods29,30. Improvements in parameter selection may lead to faster and better clinical outcomes and identify new features of interest. Here, we aim to inspire new ways to improve seizure detection accuracy by constraining the decoding platforms to the specifications of clinical brain implants and suggesting improved parameters from offline predictions that are implementable and testable through the clinical patient data management systems (PDMS) provided by Neuropace. For this, we analysed over 100 h of invasive human brain signals from neocortical depth electrodes (see Fig. 4a for an example) recorded with RNS devices in a cohort of nine patients with epilepsy (mean age, 35.3 ± 8.2 years; 8 women, all focal epilepsy; mean number of available recordings, 636.9 ± 366.4; mean recording duration, 71.07 ± 10.78 s; Supplementary Table 8). With the aim to reduce the false-positive rate of the implemented seizure detector, we performed a systematic feature optimization in a simulation of the RNS bandpass detector algorithm. This embedded algorithm is normally programmed by the clinical team via the selection of a single ictal event (‘SimpleStart’) which provides the foundation for a semi-automatized parametrization of detection settings for this specified event in the programming environment. We extracted brain signals and detection and stimulation parameters from RNS implants (Fig. 4b) using a previously described database access pipeline31. Individual recordings were annotated by a certified epileptologist for electrographic presence and onset of seizure activity. The resulting annotations served as ground truth for using machine learning methods that can identify embedded bandpass algorithm parameters using our platform. Three parameters need to be defined for the detector by the clinical team: (1) the threshold direction, that is, whether increase versus decrease in band power is associated with ictal activity, (2) the corresponding threshold amplitude and (3) the required duration the threshold is crossed for a seizure event to be detected. We optimized these parameters for sample-wise seizure classification to maximize the F1 score, which depicts the harmonic mean between precision (the model’s ability to identify only true seizure instances) and recall (the model’s ability to find all seizure instances). We focused on F1 scores instead of balanced accuracy, because ‘seizure present’ (true positive) predictions are more critical for clinical scenarios than correct ‘seizure absent’ (true negative) predictions, which is why they are commonly used as a metric for RNS seizure prediction performance32. Brain signals aligned to seizure onset revealed high-frequency synchronization followed by activity in lower-frequency bands, as previously described (Fig. 4c)33,34. An exemplar grid-search matrix spanning the threshold direction, amplitude and duration of each feature shows how py_neuromodulation can directly provide access to RNS detector parameters that can be used in the embedded framework and implemented through the PDMS (Fig. 4d,e). The identified parameter combination significantly reduced false positives, while maintaining stable true-positive rates leading to overall performance increases (F1 score for original RNS settings, 0.41 ± 0.12; F1 score for our optimized settings, 0.92 ± 0.06) (Fig. 4f). It is important to note that the embedded RNS programming environment does not have cross-validation implemented which was mirrored in our simulation and that RNS data are in part recorded because of true- or false-positive seizure detection (114.16 ± 86.42 min out of 6,515 min of total recording time were classified as ictal by expert annotations). Thus, the presented data should rather be interpreted as a proof of concept that requires further validation in prospective clinical trials. Next, we used the optimized seizure detection performances of all RNS channels combined with their specific localization (Supplementary Table 9) to identify a whole-brain network associated with optimal seizure detection, following the same connectomics approach described for movement and emotion decoding. To this end, we computed structural connectivity fingerprints from each recording channel using the Human Connectome Project (HCP) dataset (ref. 35, adapted by ref. 22; n = 985) and correlated seizure detection performances with voxel-wise connectivity. We identified a structural connectivity network (Fig. 4h and Extended Data Fig. 8) predictive of seizure decoding performance, characterized by dominant positive correlations to the bilateral temporal lobes, hippocampus, cingulate and occipital cortex, which could significantly predict seizure detection performances in a leave-one-participant-out cross-validation (rho = 0.42, P = 0.02) (Fig. 4i). Our results emphasize two key aspects regarding the use of our platform for the development of decoding algorithms for brain implants: (1) it can be of direct use for the parametrization of currently available and embedded algorithms in available brain implants, and (2) it enables the discovery of optimized feature sets and machine learning methods that can facilitate the merging of BCI approaches with closed-loop neuromodulation for the treatment of epilepsy and other brain disorders. The presented approaches for intelligent adaptive DBS could be categorized by the recently published taxonomy for BCIs by ref. 36 as therapeutic BCIs in the fields of movement disorders, depression and epilepsy. Discussion In the present study, we demonstrate the use of brain signal decoding for neuromodulation covering key innovation domains for neurotechnology across more than 123 h of brain signals from 70 patients who have undergone treatment with brain implants. First, we demonstrate the ability to decode behaviour across disease entities, movement types, acquisition systems and cohorts from the United States, Germany and China. Our pipeline achieved high decoding performance in a prospective patient-naive online validation of pretrained movement-decoding models. We propose a combination of connectomics-based channel selection and contrastive learning (CEBRA) for across-patient decoding that circumvents tedious patient individual training that would obviate widespread clinical adoption of brain signal solutions. The presented methods for decoding without patient individual training may catalyse the adoption of brain signal decoders for closed-loop neuromodulation by curbing healthcare costs and improving patient satisfaction. This will be especially relevant for future approaches that implement decoding of multiple brain states related to circadian rhythms, sleep and diverse symptoms such as tremor, freezing of gait, dyskinesia, dystonic muscle contractions, tics and more. An additional use case for this approach in the future could be to use the embedding consistency as an anatomical circuit verification, which could help identify anatomical anomalies and locate the correct optimal localization for decoding. Our study entails a step towards open sharing of brain-signal-decoding models by providing a generalizable movement decoder for invasive neurophysiology as a digital resource37. Moreover, we show that training data from an individual participant can generalize to other participants, which holds promise for across-patient decoding applications even in rare diseases, where only few datasets may be available. It may further allow to account for different dimensions of human diversity, such as anatomical variation, genetic differences and/or disease severity. We specifically want to highlight here also the limitation that the presented leave-one-participant-out and leave-one-cohort-out performances motivate the investigation of neural decoding improvements. Clinical implementation for closed-loop neuromodulation would require higher decoding accuracies to reliably address current neural states and symptoms. Next, we highlight the use of our approach beyond movement disorders, by decoding perceived emotional valence in patients with treatment-resistant depression. Here, we additionally demonstrated the predictive relevance of feature sets beyond oscillatory activity such as waveform shape for emotion decoding. Waveform shape features can reflect underlying synaptic and cellular dynamics that frequency or power alone cannot capture. For example, the sharpness or steepness of oscillatory peaks may indicate synaptic synchrony or the dynamics of inhibitory versus excitatory activity within a network6. These features can also reveal the balance of cortical excitability and inhibition38, potentially offering insights into disease states39,40,41,42. A systematic data-driven approach to neural decoding based on waveform features can result in higher accuracy and identification of new biological insights into the importance of these measures. Our results indicate that both the amplitude and rise time of neural discharges can reflect information on the computation of emotional valence in the human limbic system. This could be attributed to valence-specific changes in synaptic synchrony and afferent excitatory drive. Combining brain signal decoding with connectomics in this use case revealed the whole-brain circuits underlying emotion decoding in a left prefrontal network. The resulting network showed resemblance to previously published and validated neuromodulation targets and lesion networks that were reported to affect mood23,24,43 and may indicate optimal treatment targets to refine DBS for depression. In the future, clinical testing in patients with major depressive disorder could aim to confirm the left centric network by comparing clinical efficacy of right versus left contacts and their relationship to the prefrontal network. Finally, we showcase opportunities to directly improve parametrization of RNS detectors for specific neurophysiologic states of seizure networks, such as detection of ictal states, through feature identification using available ECoG recordings and simulation of available detector settings for the treatment of epilepsy. The vast parameter space of closed-loop systems, such as RNS, present an optimization challenge substantially better suited to machine learning models than the current lengthy and error-prone manual process. Furthermore, the features of seizure networks may change over time, delaying optimization as physicians struggle to keep up with a moving target. Timely implementation of optimal seizure detection settings, even as the network features evolve, is imperative to directly improving clinical outcomes. In the future, it would be sensible to continuously update and improve brain signal decoders using all available data on the single-participant or across-participant level. Prospective validation of this approach in clinical trials may lead to lower false-positive stimulation rates, higher temporal specificity and lower stimulation dose, and promise both faster and superior clinical outcomes with fewer side effects. Our use cases are built on the prediction of brain states in data from neurosurgical patients who have undergone treatment with neural implants for brain stimulation. However, a limitation is that through the retrospective nature of these use cases, we did not evaluate the efficacy or temporal precision of resulting brain stimulation algorithms. Nevertheless, decoding performances were investigated in the presence of clinical brain stimulation in two out of three use cases, namely, STN-DBS for Parkinson’s disease and RNS for epilepsy. Moreover, its application is particularly promising for the combination of neural population activity and LFP for the prediction of low-dimensional decoding targets. Thus, it may have additional use but will not replace the complex algorithm development in other research domains, for example, using single-unit activity in the context of spatial navigation44,45 or for complex neuroprostheses to recover speech or to provide brain-to-text communication46,47 that have reached astonishing performance through extensive optimization of recording techniques, model architectures and control policies tailored to these specific applications. Finally, some similar and many other use cases for machine-learning-based invasive brain signal decoding have been reported before1,4,5,15,27,48,49,50,51. What makes py_neuromodulation in this context unique is that it provides a collaborative open-source platform for standardized and reproducible translation of offline decoding into clinical applications. Meanwhile, it extends previous methods for feature extraction and combines them with novel solutions to across-patient decoding with MRI connectomics. The toolbox is designed with closed-loop neurostimulation in mind but at this stage primarily streamlines the decoding aspect. Nevertheless, interfacing neurostimulation hardware application programming interfaces (APIs) such as the Alpha Omega NeuroOmega or other neurostimulation systems are straightforward and provide a comprehensive solution to using machine learning models for therapeutic online adaptation. Moreover, we will continuously update and extend the capabilities for stimulation parameter adaptation for emerging technologies. With this, it is prepared to serve large-scale multicentre collaborations, as demonstrated with this study, to develop machine learning models that can generalize across centres and patients to inspire the next generation of closed-loop neurostimulation. Several widely used open-source toolboxes, such as Fieldtrip52, MNE53, Brainstorm54 and BrainDecode55, exist for signal processing and brain state decoding. The Fieldtrip toolbox also contains, with the Fieldtrip-Buffer, a method for online data processing. By contrast, all processing in py_neuromodulation is optimized for invasive brain data and developed with the target of adapting therapeutic brain stimulation algorithms in mind. Therefore, offline and online signal processing are conducted using the exact same routines, by only replacing the data stream, similar to the Buffer implemented for FieldTrip in Matlab. Thus, any analysis performed based on py_neuromodulation features is online compatible. Second, all pipeline parametrization is conducted through shareable files, which eases comparison across processing workflows and allows for effortless reproduction of established parameter specifications. Feature extraction is standardized and contains predefined feature modalities that extend far beyond what is available in other toolboxes. Finally, our toolbox implements several methods that enable neural decoding without patient individual training. For that reason, we implemented cortical and subcortical spatial interpolation methods and whole-brain connectivity estimation in combination with electrophysiological decoding. In the future, our platform may provide the foundation for network-specific and brain-state-dependent closed-loop neurostimulation approaches that dissociate symptoms56, side effects1 and volitional behaviour4,49 to offer the best therapy for the individual situation patients are facing. To give a practical example, symptom-specific brain networks have recently been discovered for STN-DBS in Parkinson’s disease that differentially underlie improvement in tremor, bradykinesia, rigidity and gait disturbance57. The network description, however, is static in nature, while symptoms wax and wane. Brain signal decoding may help these networks to come to life in a dynamic closed-loop neurostimulation approach. Invasive multisite recordings can be used to monitor the presence of symptoms in specific brain networks, and advanced control algorithms can tune stimulation parameters dynamically to stimulate precisely the networks of symptoms that are present58. In conclusion, py_neuromodulation provides an open-source platform that has the potential to democratize and standardize brain signal decoding in the development of next-generation neurotechnology that facilitates the convergence of closed-loop neurostimulation with clinical BCI approaches. Methods The open-source brain signal-decoding platform py_neuromodulation and its algorithms were developed in the Python programming language. All code and documentation are openly accessible as a Python package (licensed under an open-source-compliant MIT license). The module supports Python version 3.10 or later and is maintained on GitHub9. The GitHub repository includes instructions for installing and contributing to the package and the documentation materials that are further hosted at https://neuromodulation.github.io/py_neuromodulation/. The platform handles online data streams from neural processors equally to offline data files in Brain Imaging Data Structure format (BIDS)59; that is, data can be streamed from the API of a neural processor or from an offline stream that is simulated from data files. This secures equal performance of brain signal decoders in offline and online situations, ready-made for direct clinical adoption. Pre-processing, re-referencing, normalization and extraction of eight FFT multiband features for state predictions from a single channel on contemporary hardware (Intel i7 laptop computer) takes less than 10 ms. py_neuromodulation parametrization and initialization py_neuromodulation requires the initialization of an offline or online stream object with the sampling frequency of the recorded data and two parametrization files: channels and settings (see Supplementary Table 1 for parametrization of available features, Supplementary Table 10 for pre-processing and Supplementary Table 11 for post-processing). The channels file provides channel-specific information such as re-referencing, decoding target selection and channel renaming (Supplementary Table 12). It builds upon the channels.tsv file of the BIDS specification for intracranial electroencephalography59 and adopts parameters defined therein such as channel name, type and status. The settings file specifies parameters for feature estimation and pre- and post-processing. Both files can either be created during runtime or be loaded from disk by providing paths to a channels.csv and settings.json file. After initialization, all settings are tested, and the stream object’s run function can be called for batch-wise feature calculation. For offline applications, the stream generates sequential data batches that are processed to simulate an online setting. The size of the data batch is specified in settings. In the simplest case, the stream can then be given the entire array of recorded data. The platform additionally provides an interface to automatically load data and metadata such as sampling frequency, channel names and types, and electrode locations from files in BIDS format using MNE-BIDS60 (version 0.8). When data are directly streamed from a neural device, the same procedure can be called to process arriving data batches in precisely the same way as done for offline analysis and training. When the streams’ run function is terminated, all feature and parametrization files are saved for further analysis. Various visualization and machine learning analysis functions can then be used through the analysis module. Feature estimation A variety of features were implemented that can capture different characteristics of neural time series data from multiple data analysis domains, which may provide complementary information on brain states and behaviour8. The above-mentioned batches are analysed in segments of a defined window length and sampled at a predefined update rate that can, depending on the amount of desired segment overlap, be shorter or equal to the segment length. For extraction of oscillatory features FFT, short-time Fourier transform and finite impulse response bandpass filtering are implemented in py_neuromodulation with frequency-adapted time windows to optimize information content. Spectral parametrization can separate periodic and aperiodic components of power spectra that can provide differential information on neural processing7. We developed a wrapper for the FOOOF-toolbox7 (version 1.1.0) that allows for computation of aperiodic and periodic parameters for online decoding. In the temporal domain, the presence, amplitude and duration of oscillatory bursts were shown to provide complementary information to average oscillatory power61,62,63,64. For each feature window, mean burst duration, amplitude, burst rate per second and an in-burst state can be estimated for several frequency bands and different thresholds across a variable time window. In addition to neural oscillations, temporal waveform shape has previously been demonstrated to reflect different pathological and physiological states6,39. For multielectrode recordings, interregional functional oscillatory connectivity can provide important information for different decoding applications65. Therefore, an online-compatible coherence computation across channels and frequency bands was implemented, as well as a wrapper for the MNE-Connectivity toolbox66 (version 0.6). Temporal waveform shape estimation is implemented in py_neuromodulation in a batch-wise manner for signal troughs and peaks for which the prominence measures the mean amplitude difference of the trough and the surrounding peaks (or peak with surrounding troughs): The sharpness measures the voltage deflection of each trough/peak with respect to the voltage amplitude at time points preceding and following 5 ms: In addition, the interval between troughs/peaks can be calculated, as well as the width of the surrounding peaks/troughs, and the rise and decay time and steepness. The maxima of resulting measures per time window can then be used for model training and decoding. A schematic visualization of the temporal waveform shape features is shown in Extended Data Fig. 9. Nonlinear measures for dynamical systems (nolds)67 estimate trends in the data and characterize different metrics of the time series dynamics. The features are obtained through a wrapper for the nolds toolbox67 (version 0.6.1) and can calculate sample entropy, correlation dimension, Lyapunov exponent or detrended fluctuation analysis of raw or bandpass-filtered data67. In addition, Hjorth features can be calculated for raw data or bandpass-filtered data separately for different frequency bands68. Kalman filters can be used for post-processing of oscillatory features to reduce noise51,69,70. Electrode information py_neuromodulation reads electrode localization from BIDS iEEG metadata files, including referencing information and electrode locations, which is necessary for across-patient decoding described below. Here, it is important to note that py_neuromodulation does not provide a workflow for performing the localization of invasive electrodes but expects electrode locations to be predefined using one of the many workflows that are available in the literature71,72,73. We recommend the advanced neuroimaging pipeline defined by Lead-DBS (version 2.2.3) with default settings71. In brief, Lead-DBS uses preoperative MRI and postoperative CT scans for co-registration and normalization by default to MNI 2009b NLIN ASYM space. Electrode artefacts of both DBS and ECoG electrodes can then be visually identified and marked to obtain MNI coordinates of electrode contacts. Artefact annotation Electrophysiological recordings can be affected by multiple artefact sources. We accounted for different artefact types within py_neuromodulation and describe the parametrization methods in the following. First, notch filtering to remove power line noise can be applied with parameters specific in the settings file. Next, raw data and computed features can be clipped to limit the effect of outliers for decoding and normalization. To specifically account for artefacts resulting from neurostimulation, we implemented the ‘Period-based Artefact Reconstruction and Removal Method’74 in Python75. This allows for offline filter estimation and online application to clean signals contaminated by stimulation artefacts. In addition, for offline data, artefact annotations can be provided in a .tsv file, for example, through visual detection for which a wrapper of the mne-qt-browser GUI is provided. Feature analysis and decoding In the analysis module, features can be visualized across time for specific recording time windows or averaged for a target signal condition (Fig. 1c). Electrode locations can be plotted on a cortical surface and colour coded with obtained features or performances. Different decoding methods were implemented in the decode module. Machine learning methods can be evaluated for different validation strategies for individual or combined channels, for example, as supported by scikit-learn76 (version 0.24.2). Multiple samples can be combined for feature analysis for, for example, Wiener filter methods51. Principal component analysis or canonical correlation analysis can be used for dimensionality reduction. Features can, in addition, be selected through the Maximum Relevance and Minimum Redundancy method77. Unbalanced datasets can be resampled through random over- or undersampling using the imbalanced-learn framework78. As many decoding applications require performance evaluation on not only a sample but a consecutive group-wise level, detection accuracies can be calculated for a minimum modifiable number of high consecutive predictions, as implemented for movement detection (Fig. 2). py_neuromodulation provides optimized default parameters for straightforward invasive brain signal-decoding approaches while also allowing to seamlessly plug in new and alternative machine learning models directly in the Python code. Decoding without individual training—grid-point decoding By standardizing feature estimation and brain signal decoding, we aim to enable machine learning decoding to make use of many datasets from different patients and centres. The implemented pipeline provides, therefore, a method for unifying features and decoding across different acquisition methods. To enable generalized future movement decoding, we provide the validated across-patient machine learning model with the required pre-processing and feature computation modules as an openly available resource37. Decoding from brain implants without patient individual training needs to account for large individual variance of electrode locations and anatomy15. We implemented three methods that can achieve this: grid-point interpolation, spatial correlation of whole-brain network for channel selection and contrastive representation learning using CEBRA. Grid-point decoding relies on a predefined cortical or subcortical grid definition in a common space (for example, the non-linear asymmetric version of the Montreal Neurological Institute space MNI152NLin2009bAsym). Data from individual electrode contacts \({x}_{m}\) are interpolated to common grid points \({x}_{{{\rm{grid}}\sim{\rm{point}}\; n}}\) and weighted by their normed distances \({\rm{dist}}\left(n,m\right)\) to each grid point: All electrode contacts M are selected through a maximum distance threshold between each electrode contact \(m\) and the respective grid point \(n\). In this way, localized information is grouped to grid points that are shared across patients. Decoding without patient individual training can then be performed using the grid-point data. Therefore, this approach identifies a projection to a standardized space that is comparable to EEG layouts. Connectomics-based neural decoding Alternatively, single-ECoG or depth electrode channels can be selected through optimal connectivity. Functional and structural connectivity measures can, for example, be calculated within the Lead-Mapper tool of the Lead-DBS toolbox71 (version 2.2.3) or via pre-computed connectivity profiles based on a cortical hull or whole-brain grid79. An optimal connectomic decoding network map is then constructed through voxel-wise correlation of connectivity profiles with decoding performances from offline training11. This allows prospective channel selection even in previously unseen participants by comparing the network fingerprints of all available channels to identify the one that is most similar to the optimal connectomic decoding network map that was informed by other participants (Extended Data Fig. 5). The selected channels can then be used for learning an embedding based on the py_neuromodulation feature space using CEBRA16. Contrastive learning can thus be used to train a neural network to minimize distances between behaviourally and temporally close samples and maximize distances from temporally distinct samples. The obtained embeddings can be compared by computing a linear mapping from one embedding to another, resulting in a ‘consistency map’80. A binned histogram can be computed to take target information into consideration and correlate the resulting embeddings. This provides a powerful ground for across-patient predictions for human brain implants. Feature computation using multiprocessing Py_neuromodulation implements a data flow that builds on top of Python’s multiprocessing module, where raw data acquisition, feature computation, decoding and visualization are parallelized and multiprocessing queues used for inter-process communication. The integration of data streams using LabStreamingLayer and the required feature computation time was tested on Windows, MacOS and Ubuntu operating systems using GitHub automatic workflow testing. Given the basic GitHub Workflow Linux runners (4 CPUs, 16 GB RAM)81 hardware, the documentation hosts automatic timing estimation9. We found that the FFT feature estimation including common-average re-referencing and standard-scale feature normalization could be achieved for a six-channel data batch in 1 ms. When more complex features are included, such as temporal waveform shape and burst features, the computation time is 3 ms for a single channel. It is worth noting that timing jitters for adaptive DBS can additionally be dependent on external stimulator communication. py_neuromodulation API and example usage The general goal of the presented package is to simplify analysis of invasive electrophysiological data. For a minimal example for offline analysis, the recording in a form of a numpy array or pandas dataframe needs to be supplied in the shape (n_channels, n_time) with a respective sampling frequency. Subsequently, features are computed with a feature interval given the sampling_rate_features_hz. The following code shows the ‘stream’ initialization and call of the ‘run’ function: import py_neuromodulation as nm import numpy as np NUM_CHANNELS = 5 NUM_DATA = 10000 sfreq = 1000 # Hz sampling_rate_features_hz = 10 # Hz data = np.random.random([NUM_CHANNELS, NUM_DATA]) stream = nm.Stream( sfreq=sfreq, data=data, sampling_rate_features_hz=sampling_rate_features_hz ) features = stream.run() The returned ‘feature’ object is a dictionary containing each feature name–value pair. The general convention is that the feature names are given in the nomenclature ‘channel name’_‘feature_name’_‘feature_name_subgroup’. It is important to note that in the upper example the settings and channel-specific information were automatically defined given default parameters. Given a BIDS-data path the respective information can be queried: import py_neuromodulation as nm ( raw, data, sfreq, line_noise, coord_list, coord_names, ) = nm.io.read_BIDS_data( PATH_RUN=PATH_RUN, ) The channel dataframe can then be initialized given different parameters: channels = nm.utils.set_channels( ch_names=raw.ch_names, ch_types=raw.get_channel_types(), reference="default", bads=raw.info["bads"], new_names="default", used_types=("ecog", "dbs", "seeg"), target_keywords=["MOV_RIGHT"], ) The pre-processing and feature computation settings can be modified using a dictionary (software version tag 0.1.2). Therefore, the default settings can be obtained and modified: settings = nm.NMSettings.get_fast_compute() settings.features.fft = True settings.features.bursts = True settings.features.sharpwave_analysis = True settings.sharpwave_analysis_settings.estimator["mean"] = [] for sw_feature in settings.sharpwave_analysis_settings.sharpwave_features.list_all(): settings.sharpwave_analysis_settings.estimator["mean"].append(sw_feature) After feature computation using the ‘run’ method, a decoder module can be used to evaluate a scikit-learn model: from sklearn import metrics, model_selection, linear_model feature_reader = nm.analysis.Feature_Reader( feature_dir=PATH_OUT, feature_file=RUN_NAME, ) model = linear_model.LinearRegression() feature_reader.decoder = nm.analysis.Decoder( features=feature_reader.feature_arr, label=feature_reader.label, label_name=feature_reader.label_name, used_chs=feature_reader.used_chs, model=model, eval_method=metrics.r2_score, cv_method=model_selection.KFold(n_splits=3, shuffle=True), ) performances= feature_reader.run_ML_model( estimate_channels=True, estimate_gridpoints=False, estimate_all_channels_combined=True, save_results=True, ) Based on the used scikit-learn metric and cross-validation strategy, the performances are estimated. Multiple additional arguments can further be supplied to adapt the feature estimation and decoding pipeline. For applying the optimal connectivity decoding without patient individual training, the electrode contact MNI coordinates need to be obtained beforehand72,73 and then used for obtaining the corresponding connectivity fingerprints from either the Lead-DBS (version 2.2.3) Lead-Mapper toolbox71 or by a pre-defined grid. py_neuromodulation provides a method for obtaining matching points from a pre-defined cortical hull grid (n = 1,025 points) or whole-brain grid (1,236 points). The computed grids can be downloaded from a public repository79 and used through the following API: import numpy as np mni_coords = [[10,20,40], [12,14,50]] # definition of MNI contacts ch_sel = nm.analysis.RMAP.ConnectivityChannelSelector( whole_brain_connectome=True, func_connectivity=True ) # retrieve connectivity fingerprints for passed MNI coordinates fps, grid_idxs = ch_sel.get_closest_node(mni_coords) # computation of optimal connectivity correlations corrs = ch_sel.get_rmap_correlations(fps) recording_contact_use = np.argmax(corrs) For the movement-decoding use case, a movement-decoding model was trained that could significantly predict movement without patient individual training. The model is available via Zenodo37, and the required code is publicly available via GitHub82. The following exemplary code illustrates how the model can be loaded and directly be used in the py_neuromodulation API: import py_neuromodulation as nm import skops model = skops.io.load("movement_decoder.skops") settings = nm.NMSettings.get_fast_compute() stream = nm.Stream(settings=settings) features = stream.run(data) model.predict(features.to_numpy()) Statistical Analysis All statistical tests were computed using non-parametric Monte Carlo sampled permutation tests with a significance value of α = 0.05. Correlation values were reported using Spearman’s rho correlation coefficient. For fibre-filtering visualization, the significance value was corrected for a false discovery rate (FDR). Movement decoding from ECoG signals Invasive brain signals were analysed from 56 participants across four cohorts. The data acquisition methods varied across the four movement-decoding cohorts. Patients with Parkinson’s disease (Berlin, Beijing, Pittsburgh) underwent additional ECoG recordings in the context of neurosurgery for subthalamic DBS implantation. Motor sign severity was assessed preoperatively using UPDRS-III (total score) for all patients. Berlin participants (12 patients with Parkinson’s disease, 5 women) were recorded postoperatively through externalized 6 or 12 contact ECoG electrodes (Ad-Tech 1 × 6 layout, contact area: 12.56 mm2; Ad-Tech 1 × 6 layout, double sided, contact area: 12.56 mm2) using a Neuro Omega (Alpha Omega) acquisition system (Berlin participants 1 and 2) or with the SAGA amplifier (TMSi; Berlin participants 3 to 12). In total, there were 38 recordings, of which 17 were performed ON dopaminergic medication (11 patients). All patients were instructed to perform voluntary hand movements with the upper limb contralateral to the hemisphere of ECoG electrode placement. In a sub-cohort of 6 patients bilateral monopolar STN-DBS was delivered with clinically effective stimulation settings, as determined by monopolar review (stimulation frequency, 130 Hz; pulse width, 60 μs; mean amplitude, 2 mA). Data from the Beijing cohort was also recorded in patients with Parkinson’s disease undergoing STN-DBS using externalized ECoG electrodes (n = 10, 8 women) using a JE-212 amplifier (Nihon Kohden). Patients carried out a voluntary button press task. Six participants were measured in the medication ON condition (6 recordings). Data in the Pittsburgh cohort (n = 15 patients, 3 women, 73 recordings) was recorded intraoperatively during STN-DBS implantation using a Grapevine neural interface processor (Ripple). All patients were in medication OFF condition and performed a cued Go/No-Go task that was previously described83. The electrode set-up varied across Pittsburgh patients: Ad-Tech electrodes using 6 (layout, 1 × 6; contact area, 12.56 mm2), 8 (layout, 1 × 8; contact area, 12.56 mm2) or 28 contacts (layout, 2 × 16; contact area, 3.14 mm2) were used. All data from participants with epilepsy were measured in the Epilepsy Monitoring Unit (n = 18, 7 women) using Synamps2 amplifiers (Compumedics Neuroscan) at the University of Washington and Washington University in St. Louis. The data were previously publicly available in ref. 13 and were also analysed in a former study84. The aim of the first use case was the two-class classification problem of movement versus rest for different cohorts including different movement types across four cohorts from different neurology, neurosurgery and psychiatry centres (Berlin, Beijing, Pittsburgh, Washington). Berlin participants performed a rotational handle task. Patients were instructed as follows: ‘Perform 50 wrist rotations with your left hand with an interval of about 10 s. Do not count in between rotations’. The self-paced wrist rotations were performed on a custom-built analogue rotameter, which translates the degree of rotation into a voltage. This task was previously used and described in different studies85,86. Beijing participants engaged in a voluntary button press task and were instructed to press the button with their left index finger every 10 s while avoiding to count in between the button presses. Pittsburgh participants performed a gripping hand movement contralateral to the implanted cortical electrode. The visually cued handgrip was temporally adjusted in a Go/No-Go task and previously described in different publications11,83,87. Furthermore, we used invasive recordings from patients with epilepsy undergoing seizure monitoring from a publicly available dataset13. The patients engaged in a hand clench-and-release task. The motor_basic tasks are described in the dataset88 linked to Miller et al.13 as follows: “ ‘Cue-based movement task’: Patients performed simple, repetitive, motor tasks of hand (synchronous flexion and extension of all fingers, that is, clenching and releasing a fist at a self-paced rate of ~1–2 Hz) or tongue (opening of mouth with protrusion and retraction of the tongue, that is, sticking the tongue in and out, also at ~1–2 Hz). These movements were performed in an interval-based manner, alternating between movement and rest, and the side of movement was always contralateral to the side of cortical grid placement. There were between 30 and 75 cue presentations for each movement modality. Cues for motor movement were delivered visually in a 10 × 10 cm presentation window at a distance of 75–100 cm from patient. Visual cues were presented using the BCI 2000 program with a written word indicating the specific body part to be moved (typically, multiple movement types were interleaved in each experimental run). Stimuli were presented for 2 s or 3 s cue blocks, followed by rest intervals (indicated by a blank screen) of the same length. The patients were instructed to perform repetitive, self-paced motor movement, alternating with rest intervals of the same length (indicated by the absence of the cuing target). Repetitive motion, rather than tonic contraction, was intended to accentuate the spectral shift during each interval13.” In this analysis, we excluded the tongue movement to unify the movement effector across cohorts. We specifically included multiple cohorts and tasks to investigate and develop decoding models that can generalize across recorded brain regions, tasks, recording equipment, surgical approach and electrode models. The primary performance metric was defined as sample-wise balanced accuracy at a temporal resolution of 100 ms for each prediction. The time used for feature computation was specified to be 1 s, only preceding the current target sample, and therefore all feature computation including pre- and post-processing were applied in a causal manner. For the practical application of adaptive invasive neuromodulation, the measure of sample-wise decoding is of limited importance. In addition to reporting the sample-wise classification performances, we therefore report the accuracy of correct predicted movement blocks termed ‘movement detection rate’. If the classifier’s output probability is above 0.5 for three consecutive samples (300 ms) the present movement is classified to be detected. A movement detection rate of 1 is achieved if this criterion is fulfilled within every movement block. It is important to note, however, that this measure addresses only the movement class and has no predictive value of rest segments. For prospective model validation and to showcase the online applicability of the py_neuromodulation platform, we recruited two additional patients with Parkinson’s disease at the Movement Disorder and Neuromodulation Unit at Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin (ages, 65 and 32 years, 1 woman). ECoG recordings were measured from an Ad-Tech electrode (1 × 6 contact layout; contact area, 12.56 mm2) and a SAGA (TMSi) amplifier. Both patients performed voluntary wrist rotations as described for the Berlin cohort above. For one patient we additionally performed movement-triggered adaptive stimulation (AlphaOmega Neuro Omega). To demonstrate movement decoding across centres, movement types and diseases, we computed features and applied standardized machine learning decoding methods across the four cohorts as described above. Data from all participants were streamed in batches of 100 ms, and the following processing chain was applied to every batch: All data were resampled to 1 kHz and re-referenced by subtracting the common average, and FFT features were calculated for different frequency bands: θ (4–8 Hz), α (8–12 Hz), low β (13–20 Hz), high β (20–35 Hz), low γ (60–80 Hz), high γ (90–200 Hz) and HFA (200–400 Hz) analysed in segments of 1,000 ms and updated at a rate of 10 Hz resulting in a temporal resolution of 100 ms. All features were z-score normalized across the past 30 s and clipped at ±3, to normalize the feature range across participants and cohorts. Ridge-regularized logistic regression models were trained based on motor output that was provided as the target channel using balanced class weights for prediction of movement presence using scikit-learn76. Performance on each channel was assessed using the balanced accuracy metric, which considers imbalances in target distributions. Three-fold cross-validation was used on consecutive data segments without shuffling individual samples, which can lead to data leakage through temporal correlation of feature estimates. For across-patient decoding, electrode contact localization was performed or available from neuroimaging as a prerequisite to the three different approaches described above: first, the features were projected to a custom 38-point sensorimotor grid in MNI space with a maximum channel-to-grid-point distance of 20 mm. Logistic regression classifiers were trained on grid points instead of channels for each patient. This circumvents the requirement to select single channels at the patient level. Alternatively, in a second approach, channel selection was performed using connectomics. A spherical seed (4 mm radius) was used as a region of interest (ROI) to compute the connectivity profiles for each recording contact using Lead-Connectome Mapper in the Lead-DBS toolbox71. Openly accessible connectomes were used for patients with Parkinson’s disease (https://www.ppmi-info.org/; Parkinson’s Progression Markers Initiative (PPMI), n = 75)89, originally published by Marek and colleagues90, and for patients with epilepsy (ref. 91; n = 1,000). An optimal connectomic network map for movement decoding was calculated using voxel-wise correlations of channel-specific balanced accuracies connectivity profiles. py_neuromodulation was then used to validate the computed connectomic decoding network map across different cross-validation strategies: leave-one-participant-out validation within cohorts, leave-one-participant-out validation across cohorts and leave-one-cohort-out cross-validation. CEBRA contrastive learning was used with the ‘offset10-model’ five-layer convolutional neural network (32 hidden units for the first layer, followed by three convolutional skip layers with each 32 hidden units and a four-dimensional convolutional output layer). The skip layers resembled a bottleneck across the temporal filter dimension from 10 to 3 samples. A Gaussian error linear unit activation function was used for each layer, and normalization was applied to the output layer. The ‘auto’ temperature mode was specified with a learning rate of 0.005; 1,000 training iterations were used with a batch size of 100. Positive sampling with the InfoNCE loss function was performed by sampling time samples within a ‘time_offset’ of 1 and samples respective to the auxiliary movement variable as defined in the target channel. To approximate the movement kinematics, a Gaussian filter with sigma 1.5 was used to smooth each label and colour code the exemplar embeddings. The Gaussian filter transformed the binary classification labels into a continuous label vector, which empirically improved performance. For the Berlin and Pittsburgh cohorts, which included continuous movement recordings, the Gaussian filter convolution resulted in unvaried continuous movement traces compared to the original recorded signals. Online processing for movement-based adaptive stimulation All pre-processing, feature estimation and post-processing steps of py_neuromodulation were optimized for online application. Online raw data visualization was realized using BrainStreamingLayer92 (GitHub version May 2023), and features as well as model predictions were visualized using Timeflux93 (version 0.16.0). All features were saved using Timeflux in the hdf5 format for post hoc training and model comparison. The settings and channels specification files can be identical for offline and online analysis. To demonstrate its use in the movement-decoding scenario for a newly recruited patient, the offline data batch generator was replaced by the API of a hardware acquisition system (TMSi SAGA) to livestream signal batches directly from the neural implant. In an initial movement recording run (as described for the remaining Berlin cohort), a pretrained model from all other Berlin cohort patients was applied, and online decoding performance was objectified for the patient-naive ‘plug and play’ application. Simultaneously, data were stored and used for offline training of a patient individual model after the first run was concluded. In addition to decoding movement, we further recruited a second exemplar patient with early onset Parkinson’s disease (age, 32 years, 1 man). ECoG recordings were acquired from an Ad-Tech electrode (1 × 6 contact layout; contact area, 12.56 mm2) and a SAGA (TMSi) amplifier. The Alpha Omega NeuroOmega was used for movement-triggered stimulation. The movement-decoding model was a linear model trained on all other Berlin participants, which is also publicly available37. To mitigate the stimulation artefact contribution, the ECoG channel used for feature estimation was bipolarly referenced to the adjacent channels and in py_neuromodulation common average re-referenced. Features were z-score normalized within a time range of 30 s and clipped at ±3 standard deviations. Once the movement decoder probability output exceeded a pre-defined threshold (0.25), stimulation was triggered through the Alpha Omega NeuroOmega API for a duration of 1 s. Stimulation was enabled only on the clinically effective contralateral DBS contact (stimulation frequency = 130 Hz, amplitude = 1.5 mA). All code required for reproduction of the online implementation using the TMSi SAGA acquisition system are publicly available in the online_decode GitHub branch of the py_neuromodulation repository9. Emotion decoding in patients with major depression Data from treatment-resistant depression participants (n = 8, 3 women) engaging in an emotion picture-viewing task was retrospectively analysed20. Patients were resistant to treatment of cognitive behavioural therapy and/or electroconvulsive therapy and underwent a clinical trial at Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin. Supplementary Table 7 shows the following details: age and preoperative and 24 month DBS BDI follow-up scores as reported in ref. 94. Data were recorded using DBS electrodes (Medtronic model 3387). Through post-operative fMRI images, electrode locations were estimated through the Lead-DBS software and co-registered to MNI space71. Patients were participating in a passive picture-viewing task showing pleasant, unpleasant and neutral stimuli of the IAPS95. Pictures were presented with a duration of 1 s and with a randomized inter-stimulus interval of 6–8 s. In addition, pictures were matched for mean neutral valence and arousal. All recordings were referenced bipolarly and band-pass filtered between 0.5 and 250 Hz through a recording hardware (D360 Digitimer). Data with epochs containing different emotional stimuli were concatenated to build the simulated data stream of invasive recordings from patients with treatment-resistant depression. The time periods containing stimulus presentation were labelled according to the emotion class. As data were already hardware bipolar re-referenced, no re-referencing was specified. Raw data batches were subject to 1,000 ms segments and updated at 10 Hz from the signal stream. Segments were notch-filtered, and FFT features (θ (4–8 Hz), α (8–12 Hz), low β (13–20 Hz), high β (20–35 Hz), low γ (60–80 Hz), high γ (90–200 Hz) and HFA (200–400 Hz)) as well as temporal waveform shape features (max prominence, mean interval, max sharpness, mean decay time, mean rise time) were calculated. Performances for different classification problems were obtained using a ridge-regularized and class-weight-balanced logistic regression model. Healthy participant functional and diffusion-weighted structural MRI connectivity profiles, as well as structural connectivity using fibre tracts, were calculated for each recording contact location (ROI seed with 4 mm radius) using openly accessible connectomes (ref. 91 for fMRI connectome; n = 1,000). This allowed the calculation of optimal connectomic emotion-decoding network maps that were validated in leave-one-channel-out and leave-one-participant-out cross-validation approaches (Extended Data Fig. 6). The Lead Connectome Mapper within the Lead-DBS toolbox71 was used for functional connectivity estimation. Structural connectivity was estimated between recording contacts ROI with a spherical seed (4 mm radius) and all other brain regions. Here we used the multi-shell diffusion-weighted imaging data acquired within the HCP (ref. 96; n = 985 participants). For each participant, fibres were normalized into ICBM 2009b Nonlinear Asymmetric (‘MNI’) standard space using Advanced Normalization Tools97 (version 0.5.5). We used Advanced Normalization Tools for volumetric registration within LeadDBS as it was previously shown as the best metric for cortical regions98 and separately subcortical regions for DBS in movement disorders99. For each tract, a two-sample t-test was calculated between the associated decoding performances of connected and unconnected recording contact ROIs. The t value was then used to colour code each fibre tract. Positive significant fibre tracts were thus connected to many recording contacts with high decoding performance. Negative fibre tracts on the contrary were connected to many poor performance recording contacts. To account for multiple-comparison tests, a FDR with α = 0.05 was designated for defining statistical significance. Seizure decoding for RNS Intracranial data from 9 patients was obtained through the Biophysically Rational Analysis for Informed Neural Stimulation (BRAINStim) platform developed from the Brain Modulation Lab31. Patient individual information such as number of depth leads and ECoG strip electrodes, recording locations, time since RNS implantation and seizure reduction scores are displayed in Supplementary Table 9. The RNS device can be programmed for storage of scheduled recordings, as well as high-risk seizure recordings (called long episodes). The concatenated recordings were further annotated for seizure presence and aligned with detection and stimulation events that the BRAINStim platform further logs from the PDMS. The previously published BRAINStim pipeline allows to access streamed recordings from the RNS implant31. Electrophysiological data from either lead-depth or ECoG strip electrodes was stored across multiple months in addition to stimulation and detection events in a database. Each recording was linked to a set of stimulation and detection events, as well as seizure presence annotations from an expert neurologist. py_neuromodulation was used to first assess the performance of different detection settings using the bandpass seizure detector. Raw data batches of 100 ms were subjected to segments of 1,000 ms at an update rate of 1 Hz resulting in a temporal resolution of 1 s. FFT features were calculated for different frequency bands (θ (4–8 Hz), α (8–12 Hz), low β (13–20 Hz), high β (20–35 Hz), low γ (35–60 Hz), broadband (20–120 Hz)). Feature normalization was omitted to ensure feature discriminability across ictal and non-ictal recordings. As data were hardware bipolar referenced, no additional software re-referencing was performed. Data segments from two artefact components were identified and excluded from further analysis: First, stimulation events resulted in the RNS stored data as a ‘flatline’ stationary artefact, which does not contain electrophysiological data. Second, suboptimal amplifier gain settings resulted in a ‘clipping’ artefact, where all data are clipped to analogue-to-digital converter respective maximum bounds. Both artefact types were identified if the voltage derivative did not change in a time range of at least 12 consecutive samples (48 ms). As stimulation events induce additionally high amplitude fluctuations in the RNS stored recordings, 2 s following each stimulation pulse were annotated to contain artefacts. Both artefact types and their corresponding annotations in the raw signal and FFT features are visualized in Extended Data Fig. 10. A performance of seizure presence decoding was obtained by optimizing different detection parameters. A recording was classified as seizure if for a defined minimum duration the voltage amplitude crossed a certain threshold. In a grid search, the minimum duration was tested across 50 values from 100 to 5,000 ms in steps of 100 ms, and the amplitude was sampled from 20 equally spaced values within the minimum and maximum voltage range. In addition, each feature could be inverted by the RNS implant, resulting in a three-dimensional grid search across minimum duration, minimum amplitude and inversion. The obtained seizure classification was measured as an F1 score and compared against the RNS programmed bandpass-detector prediction performance. For a subset of the cohort (n = 7) electrode localizations were obtained either through the Lead-DBS pipeline or through co-registration in Brainstorm54 and manual annotation of electrode contacts. As each RNS electrode contains four recording contacts and bipolar referencing is applied between contact pairs, the midpoint between the coordinates of contact pairs was estimated. Subsequently, structural connectivity was computed with the Lead Connectome Mapper in Lead-DBS.71 using dMRI data from the HCP35 adapted by ref. 22 (n = 985). Here, a spherical seed was used for each recording channel with a radius of 4 mm to estimate connectivity maps. Next, leave-one-patient-out cross-validation optimal structural seizure detection connectivity profiles were estimated. The optimal seizure detection connectivity map was thus repetitively estimated by correlating individual channel connectivity voxel values with the RNS channel-specific seizure detection performances. This approach is equivalent to the connectomics approach for movement and depression described above, but dMRI images were used instead of fMRI. Ethics declaration The research and brain signal recordings presented in this manuscript were performed according to the standards set by the declaration of Helsinki and after approval of the local independent ethics review board at the included academic centres (Berlin, Beijing, Pittsburgh, Washington). All patients provided informed consent to participate in the respective research. For data from Berlin, the studies were approved by the ethics committee at Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin (EA2/129/17). The data were collected, stored and processed in compliance with the General Privacy Protection Regulation of the European Union. All patients from Pittsburgh provided written, informed consent in accordance with a protocol approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of the University of Pittsburgh (IRB protocol number PRO13110420). The data collection for Beijing was approved by the independent review board of Beijing Tiantan Hospital (KY 2018-008-01), registered in the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (ChiCTR1900026601) and conducted under the supervision of an authoritative third party (China National Clinical Research Center for Neurological Diseases). Data from Washington were obtained under experimental protocols approved by the IRB of the University of Washington (12193) as indicated in the original data repository that is openly available (https://searchworks.stanford.edu/view/zk881ps0522, ‘A Library of Human Electrocorticographic Data and Analyses’13, first published in ref. 84). Data for the emotion-decoding depression analysis was previously registered (Clinicaltrials.gov registration number NCT00531726). All patients participated in a purely voluntary manner, after providing informed written consent, under experimental protocols approved by the IRB of the University of Washington (12193). The data are from the library described in ref. 13, which is freely available at https://searchworks.stanford.edu/view/zk881ps0522. All patient data were anonymized according to IRB protocol, in accordance with Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act mandate. These data originally appeared in ref. 84. Reporting summary Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability Data for movement decoding are available for the Pittsburgh100 and Washington13 cohorts. Data from Berlin are available conditionally through data-sharing agreements in accordance with data privacy statements signed by the patients within the legal framework of the General Data Protection Regulation of the European Union within a time frame of 6 months. Requests should be directed to W.-J.N. (julian.neumann@charite.de) or the Open Data officer (OpenData-Neuromodulation@charite.de). Data from Beijing are available upon reasonable request after approval by the local independent review board of Beijing Tiantan Hospital within a time frame of 6 months. Source data are provided with this paper. Code availability All code and documentation for py_neuromodulation are openly available as a Python package (Python version >=3.11) licensed under an open-source-compliant MIT license via GitHub at https://github.com/neuromodulation/py_neuromodulation (ref. 9). All code for the real-time implementation using the TMSi SAGA acquisition system is publicly available via the GitHub branch online_decode of the py_neuromodulation repository at https://github.com/neuromodulation/py_neuromodulation (ref. 9). Code for the offline movement-decoding analysis (https://github.com/timonmerk/AcrossCohortMovementDecoding)101, emotion-decoding analysis (https://github.com/timonmerk/TRD_pynm)102 and RNS parameter optimization analysis (https://github.com/timonmerk/rns_pynm_optimal_detection_params)103 is available via GitHub. The across-patient decoding model is openly available for direct implementation in clinical research via GitHub at https://github.com/neuromodulation/AcrossPatientDecodingModel (ref. 82), and the model weights are available via Zenodo at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10794369 (ref. 37). We used Lead-DBS v3.1 (ref. 71) within Matlab2021a for the connectivity estimation. References - Gilron, R. et al. Long-term wireless streaming of neural recordings for circuit discovery and adaptive stimulation in individuals with Parkinson’s disease. Nat. Biotechnol. 39, 1078–1085 (2021). - Khambhati, A. N., Shafi, A., Rao, V. R. & Chang, E. F. Long-term brain network reorganization predicts responsive neurostimulation outcomes for focal epilepsy. Sci. Transl. Med. 13, eabf6588 (2021). - Lorach, H. et al. Walking naturally after spinal cord injury using a brain–spine interface. Nature 618, 126–133 (2023). - Opri, E. et al. Chronic embedded cortico-thalamic closed-loop deep brain stimulation for the treatment of essential tremor. Sci. Transl. Med. 12, eaay7680 (2020). - Scangos, K. W. et al. Closed-loop neuromodulation in an individual with treatment-resistant depression. Nat. Med. 27, 1696–1700 (2021). - Cole, S. R. & Voytek, B. Brain oscillations and the importance of waveform shape. Trends Cogn. Sci. 21, 137–149 (2017). - Donoghue, T. et al. Parameterizing neural power spectra into periodic and aperiodic components. Nat. Neurosci. 23, 1655–1665 (2020). - Merk, T. et al. Machine learning based brain signal decoding for intelligent adaptive deep brain stimulation. Exp. Neurol. 351, 113993 (2022). - Merk, T. et al. neuromodulation/py_neuromodulation. GitHub https://github.com/neuromodulation/py_neuromodulation (2025). - Fries, P. Rhythms for cognition: communication through coherence. Neuron 88, 220–235 (2015). - Merk, T. et al. Electrocorticography is superior to subthalamic local field potentials for movement decoding in Parkinson’s disease. Elife 11, e75126 (2022). - de Hemptinne, C. et al. Therapeutic deep brain stimulation reduces cortical phase-amplitude coupling in Parkinson’s disease. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 779–786 (2015). - Miller, K. J. A library of human electrocorticographic data and analyses. Nat. Hum. Behav. 3, 1225–1235 (2019). - Crowell, A. L. et al. Oscillations in sensorimotor cortex in movement disorders: an electrocorticography study. Brain 135, 615–630 (2012). - Peterson, S. M., Steine-Hanson, Z., Davis, N., Rao, R. P. N. & Brunton, B. W. Generalized neural decoders for transfer learning across participants and recording modalities. J. Neural Eng. 18, 026014 (2021). - Schneider, S., Lee, J. H. & Mathis, M. W. Learnable latent embeddings for joint behavioural and neural analysis. Nature 617, 360–368 (2023). - Oord, A. van den, Li, Y. & Vinyals, O. Representation learning with contrastive predictive coding. Preprint at arXiv https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1807.03748 (2019). - Figee, M. & Mayberg, H. The future of personalized brain stimulation. Nat. Med. 27, 196–197 (2021). - Sendi, M. S. E. et al. Intraoperative neural signals predict rapid antidepressant effects of deep brain stimulation. Transl. Psychiatry 11, 1–7 (2021). - Huebl, J. et al. Processing of emotional stimuli is reflected by modulations of beta band activity in the subgenual anterior cingulate cortex in patients with treatment resistant depression. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 11, 1290–1298 (2016). - Baldermann, J. C. et al. Connectivity profile predictive of effective deep brain stimulation in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 85, 735–743 (2019). - Li, N. et al. A unified connectomic target for deep brain stimulation in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Nat. Commun. 11, 3364 (2020). - Siddiqi, S. H. et al. Brain stimulation and brain lesions converge on common causal circuits in neuropsychiatric disease. Nat. Hum. Behav. 5, 1707–1716 (2021). - Irmen, F. et al. Left prefrontal connectivity links subthalamic stimulation with depressive symptoms. Ann. Neurol. 87, 962–975 (2020). - Fox, M. D. et al. Resting-state networks link invasive and noninvasive brain stimulation across diverse psychiatric and neurological diseases. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, E4367–E4375 (2014). - Riva-Posse, P. et al. Autonomic arousal elicited by subcallosal cingulate stimulation is explained by white matter connectivity. Brain Stimul. 12, 743–751 (2019). - Xiao, J. et al. Decoding depression severity from intracranial neural activity. Biol. Psychiatry 94, 445–453 (2023). - Nair, D. R. et al. Nine-year prospective efficacy and safety of brain-responsive neurostimulation for focal epilepsy. Neurology 95, e1244–e1256 (2020). - Hixon, A. M. et al. RNS modifications to eliminate stimulation-triggered signs or symptoms (STS): case series and practical guide. Epilepsy Behav. 112, 107327 (2020). - Jobst, B. C. et al. Brain-responsive neurostimulation in patients with medically intractable seizures arising from eloquent and other neocortical areas. Epilepsia 58, 1005–1014 (2017). - Sisterson, N. D., Wozny, T. A., Kokkinos, V., Constantino, A. & Richardson, R. M. Closed-loop brain stimulation for drug-resistant epilepsy: towards an evidence-based approach to personalized medicine. Neurotherapeutics 16, 119–127 (2019). - Peterson, V. et al. Deep net detection and onset prediction of electrographic seizure patterns in responsive neurostimulation. Epilepsia 64, 2056–2069 (2023). - Grinenko, O. et al. A fingerprint of the epileptogenic zone in human epilepsies. Brain 141, 117–131 (2018). - Zaher, N. et al. Ictal onset signatures predict favorable outcomes of laser thermal ablation for mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. Front. Neurol. 11, 595454 (2020). - Setsompop, K. et al. Pushing the limits of in vivo diffusion MRI for the Human Connectome Project. Neuroimage 80, 220–233 (2013). - Robinson, J. T. et al. An application-based taxonomy for brain–computer interfaces. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 9, 789–791 (2025). - Merk, T. et al. Invasive across patient movement decoding model. Zenodo https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10794369 (2025). - Gao, R., Peterson, E. J. & Voytek, B. Inferring synaptic excitation/inhibition balance from field potentials. NeuroImage 158, 70–78 (2017). - Cole, S. R. et al. Nonsinusoidal beta oscillations reflect cortical pathophysiology in Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurosci. 37, 4830–4840 (2017). - O’Keeffe, A. B., Malekmohammadi, M., Sparks, H. & Pouratian, N. Synchrony drives motor cortex beta bursting, waveform dynamics, and phase-amplitude coupling in Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurosci. 40, 5833–5846 (2020). - Parr-Brownlie, L. C., Itoga, C. A., Walters, J. R. & Underwood, C. F. Oscillatory waveform sharpness asymmetry changes in motor thalamus and motor cortex in a rat model of Parkinson’s disease. Exp. Neurol. 354, 114089 (2022). - Jackson, N., Cole, S. R., Voytek, B. & Swann, N. C. Characteristics of waveform shape in Parkinson’s disease detected with scalp electroencephalography. eNeuro https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0151-19.2019 (2019). - Weigand, A. et al. Prospective validation that subgenual connectivity predicts antidepressant efficacy of transcranial magnetic stimulation sites. Biol. Psychiatry 84, 28–37 (2018). - Stangl, M. et al. Boundary-anchored neural mechanisms of location-encoding for self and others. Nature 589, 420–425 (2021). - Topalovic, U. et al. A wearable platform for closed-loop stimulation and recording of single-neuron and local field potential activity in freely moving humans. Nat. Neurosci. 26, 517–527 (2023). - Moses, D. A. et al. Neuroprosthesis for decoding speech in a paralyzed person with anarthria. New Engl. J. Med. 385, 217–227 (2021). - Willett, F. R., Avansino, D. T., Hochberg, L. R., Henderson, J. M. & Shenoy, K. V. High-performance brain-to-text communication via handwriting. Nature 593, 249–254 (2021). - Basu, I. et al. Closed-loop enhancement and neural decoding of cognitive control in humans. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 7, 576–588 (2023). - He, S. et al. Closed-loop deep brain stimulation for essential tremor based on thalamic local field potentials. Mov. Disord. 36, 863–873 (2021). - Moses, D. A., Leonard, M. K., Makin, J. G. & Chang, E. F. Real-time decoding of question-and-answer speech dialogue using human cortical activity. Nat. Commun. 10, 3096 (2019). - Shah, S. A., Tan, H., Tinkhauser, G. & Brown, P. Towards real-time, continuous decoding of gripping force from deep brain local field potentials. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 26, 1460–1468 (2018). - Oostenveld, R., Fries, P., Maris, E. & Schoffelen, J.-M. FieldTrip: open source software for advanced analysis of MEG, EEG, and invasive electrophysiological data. Comput. Intell. Neurosci. 2011, 156869 (2011). - Gramfort, A. et al. MEG and EEG data analysis with MNE-Python. Front. Neurosci. 7, 267 (2013). - Tadel, F., Baillet, S., Mosher, J. C., Pantazis, D. & Leahy, R. M. Brainstorm: a user-friendly application for MEG/EEG analysis. Comput. Intell. Neurosci. 2011, e879716 (2011). - Schirrmeister, R. T. et al. Deep learning with convolutional neural networks for EEG decoding and visualization. Hum. Brain Mapp. 38, 5391–5420 (2017). - Lauro, P. M. et al. Concurrent decoding of distinct neurophysiological fingerprints of tremor and bradykinesia in Parkinson’s disease. Elife 12, e84135 (2023). - Hollunder, B. et al. Toward personalized medicine in connectomic deep brain stimulation. Prog. Neurobiol. 210, 102211 (2022). - Hollunder, B. et al. Mapping dysfunctional circuits in the frontal cortex using deep brain stimulation. Nat. Neurosci. 27, 573–586 (2024). - Holdgraf, C. et al. iEEG-BIDS, extending the Brain Imaging Data Structure specification to human intracranial electrophysiology. Sci. Data 6, 102 (2019). - Appelhoff, S. et al. MNE-BIDS: organizing electrophysiological data into the BIDS format and facilitating their analysis. J. Open Source Softw. 4, 1896 (2019). - Feingold, J., Gibson, D. J., DePasquale, B. & Graybiel, A. M. Bursts of beta oscillation differentiate postperformance activity in the striatum and motor cortex of monkeys performing movement tasks. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 13687–13692 (2015). - Lofredi, R. et al. Subthalamic beta bursts correlate with dopamine-dependent motor symptoms in 106 Parkinson’s patients. NPJ Parkinsons Dis. 9, 2 (2023). - Tinkhauser, G. et al. The modulatory effect of adaptive deep brain stimulation on beta bursts in Parkinson’s disease. Brain 140, 1053–1067 (2017). - Torrecillos, F., He, S., Kühn, A. A. & Tan, H. Average power and burst analysis revealed complementary information on drug-related changes of motor performance in Parkinson’s disease. NPJ Parkinsons Dis. 9, 93 (2023). - Yao, L., Baker, J. L., Schiff, N. D., Purpura, K. P. & Shoaran, M. Predicting task performance from biomarkers of mental fatigue in global brain activity. J. Neural Eng. 18, 036001 (2021). - Li, A. et al. mne-connectivity. GitHub https://github.com/mne-tools/mne-connectivity (2024). - Schölzel, C. Nonlinear measures for dynamical systems. Zenodo https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3814723 (2019). - Hjorth, B. EEG analysis based on time domain properties. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. https://doi.org/10.1016/0013-4694(70)90143-4 (1970). - Eliseyev, A. & Aksenova, T. Penalized multi-way partial least squares for smooth trajectory decoding from electrocorticographic (ECoG) recording. PLoS ONE 11, e0154878 (2016). - Yao, L., Brown, P. & Shoaran, M. Improved detection of Parkinsonian resting tremor with feature engineering and Kalman filtering. Clin. Neurophysiol. 131, 274–284 (2020). - Neudorfer, C. et al. Lead-DBS v3.0: mapping deep brain stimulation effects to local anatomy and global networks. NeuroImage 268, 119862 (2023). - Soper, D. J. et al. Modular pipeline for reconstruction and localization of implanted intracranial ECoG and sEEG electrodes. PLoS ONE 18, e0287921 (2023). - Randazzo, M. J. et al. Three-dimensional localization of cortical electrodes in deep brain stimulation surgery from intraoperative fluoroscopy. Neuroimage 125, 515–521 (2016). - Dastin-van Rijn, E. M. et al. Uncovering biomarkers during therapeutic neuromodulation with PARRM: period-based artifact reconstruction and removal method. Cell Rep. Methods 1, 100010 (2021). - Binns, T. S. & Merk, T. PyPARRM v1.1.0. Zenodo https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8360751 (2023). - Pedregosa, F. et al. Scikit-learn: machine learning in Python. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 12, 2825–2830 (2011). - Zhao, Z., Anand, R. & Wang, M. Maximum relevance and minimum redundancy feature selection methods for a marketing machine learning platform. in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA) 442–452 (2019). - Lemaître, G., Nogueira, F. & Aridas, C. K. Imbalanced-learn: a Python toolbox to tackle the curse of imbalanced datasets in machine learning. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 18, 1–5 (2017). - Merk, T. Functional and structural computed connectivity profiles for pre-defined whole-brain and cortical hull maps. Zenodo https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10805915 (2024). - Roeder, G., Metz, L. & Kingma, D. On linear identifiability of learned representations. in Proc. 38th International Conference on Machine Learning 139, 9030–9039 (PMLR, 2021). - About GitHub-hosted runners. GitHub Docs https://docs.github.com/en/actions/concepts/runners/about-github-hosted-runners (2025). - Merk, T. et al. neuromodulation/AcrossPatientDecodingModel. GitHub https://github.com/neuromodulation/AcrossPatientDecodingModel (2025). - Kondylis, E. D. et al. Movement-related dynamics of cortical oscillations in Parkinson’s disease and essential tremor. Brain 139, 2211–2223 (2016). - Miller, K. J. et al. Spectral changes in cortical surface potentials during motor movement. J. Neurosci. 27, 2424–2432 (2007). - Lofredi, R. et al. Dopamine-dependent scaling of subthalamic gamma bursts with movement velocity in patients with Parkinson’s disease. Elife 7, e31895 (2018). - Brücke, C. et al. Scaling of movement is related to pallidal γ oscillations in patients with dystonia. J. Neurosci. 32, 1008–1019 (2012). - Peterson, V. et al. Movement decoding using spatio-spectral features of cortical and subcortical local field potentials. Exp. Neurol. 359, 114261 (2023). - Miller, K. J. A library of human electrocorticographic data and analyses. Stanford Digital Repository https://searchworks.stanford.edu/view/zk881ps0522 (2016). - Ewert, S. et al. Toward defining deep brain stimulation targets in MNI space: a subcortical atlas based on multimodal MRI, histology and structural connectivity. Neuroimage 170, 271–282 (2018). - Parkinson Progression Marker Initiative The Parkinson Progression Marker Initiative (PPMI). Prog. Neurobiol. 95, 629–635 (2011). - Yeo, B. T. T. et al. The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. J. Neurophysiol. 106, 1125–1165 (2011). - bsl-tools/bsl: a framework for real-time brain signal streaming. GitHub https://github.com/bsl-tools/bsl (2023). - Clisson, P., Bertrand-Lalo, R., Congedo, M., Victor-Thomas, G. & Chatel-Goldman, J. Timeflux: an open-source framework for the acquisition and near real-time processing of signal streams. in BCI 2019-8th International Brain-Computer Interface Conference; https://doi.org/10.3217/978-3-85125-682-6-17 (2019). - Merkl, A. et al. Deep brain stimulation of the subcallosal cingulate gyrus in patients with treatment-resistant depression: a double-blinded randomized controlled study and long-term follow-up in eight patients. J. Affect. Disord. 227, 521–529 (2018). - Bradley, M. M. & Lang, P. J. International affective picture system. in Encyclopedia of Personality and Individual Differences (eds Zeigler-Hill, V. & Shackelford, T. K.) 1–4 (Springer International Publishing, 2017); https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-28099-8_42-1 - Van Essen, D. C. et al. The WU-Minn Human Connectome Project: an overview. Neuroimage 80, 62–79 (2013). - Avants, B. B., Tustison, N. & Song, G. Advanced normalization tools (ANTS). Insight J. 2, 1–35 (2009). - Klein, A. et al. Evaluation of 14 nonlinear deformation algorithms applied to human brain MRI registration. Neuroimage 46, 786–802 (2009). - Vogel, D. et al. Anatomical brain structures normalization for deep brain stimulation in movement disorders. Neuroimage Clin. 27, 102271 (2020). - Merk, T. et al. Replication data for: Electrocorticography is superior to subthalamic local field potentials for movement decoding in Parkinson’s disease. Harvard Dataverse https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/IO2FLM (2022). - Merk, T. et al. timonmerk/AcrossCohortMovementDecoding. GitHub https://github.com/timonmerk/AcrossCohortMovementDecoding (2025). - Merk, T. et al. timonmerk/TRD_pynm. GitHub https://github.com/timonmerk/TRD_pynm (2025). - Merk, T. et al. timonmerk/rns_pynm_optimal_detection_params. GitHub https://github.com/timonmerk/rns_pynm_optimal_detection_params (2025). - Makris, N. et al. Decreased volume of left and total anterior insular lobule in schizophrenia. Schizophr. Res. 83, 155–171 (2006). - Fox, M. D., Buckner, R. L., White, M. P., Greicius, M. D. & Pascual-Leone, A. Efficacy of TMS targets for depression is related to intrinsic functional connectivity with the subgenual cingulate. Biol. Psychiatry 72, 595–603 (2012). - Herwig, U., Satrapi, P. & Schönfeldt-Lecuona, C. Using the international 10-20 EEG system for positioning of transcranial magnetic stimulation. Brain Topogr. 16, 95–99 (2003). - Herbsman, T. et al. More lateral and anterior prefrontal coil location is associated with better repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation antidepressant response. Biol. Psychiatry 66, 509–515 (2009). - Rajkowska, G. & Goldman-Rakic, P. S. Cytoarchitectonic definition of prefrontal areas in the normal human cortex: II. Variability in locations of areas 9 and 46 and relationship to the Talairach coordinate system. Cereb. Cortex 5, 323–337 (1995). - Paus, T., Castro-Alamancos, M. A. & Petrides, M. Cortico-cortical connectivity of the human mid-dorsolateral frontal cortex and its modulation by repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation. Eur. J. Neurosci. 14, 1405–1411 (2001). - Cho, S. S. & Strafella, A. P. rTMS of the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex modulates dopamine release in the ipsilateral anterior cingulate cortex and orbitofrontal cortex. PLoS ONE 4, e6725 (2009). - Rusjan, P. M. et al. Optimal transcranial magnetic stimulation coil placement for targeting the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex using novel magnetic resonance image-guided neuronavigation. Hum. Brain Mapp. 31, 1643–1652 (2010). - Fitzgerald, P. B. et al. A randomized trial of rTMS targeted with MRI based neuro-navigation in treatment-resistant depression. Neuropsychopharmacology 34, 1255–1262 (2009). - Kurdi, B., Lozano, S. & Banaji, M.R. Introducing the Open Affective Standardized Image Set (OASIS). Behav. Res. Methods 49, 457–470 (2017). Acknowledgements Foremost, we would like to thank all patients who made this research possible. Next, we also want to mention that the py_neuromodulation toolbox depends on many open-source contributors. Computation has been performed on the high-performance computing (HPC) cluster for the Research cluster of the Berlin Institute of Health. We acknowledge support from the German Research Foundation and the Open Access Publication Fund of Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin. The study was funded by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (German Research Foundation) Project-ID 424778381 and a US–German Collaborative Research in Computational Neuroscience grant from the German Federal Ministry for Research and Education and National Institutes of Health (R01NS110424). W.-J.N. received funding from the European Union (European Research Council, ReinforceBG, project 101077060). A.A.K. has received grant funding from the Lundbeck foundation. A.H. was supported by the Schilling Foundation, the German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, 424778381 – TRR 295), Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DynaSti grant within the EU Joint Programme Neurodegenerative Disease Research), the National Institutes of Health (R01MH130666, 1R01NS127892-01, 2R01 MH113929 and UM1NS132358) and the New Venture Fund (Foundation for OCD Research (FFOR) Seed Grant). Some data used in the preparation of this article were obtained from the PPMI database (https://www.ppmi-info.org/). For up-to-date information on the study, visit https://www.ppmi-info.org/. PPMI, a public–private partnership, is funded by the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research. For funding partners, see https://www.ppmi-info.org/fundingpartners. Ethics declarations Competing interests R.M.R. has served as a consultant for NeuroPace. R.L. reports personal fees from Medtronic. A.A.K. reports personal fees from Medtronic and Boston Scientific. G.-H.S. reports personal fees from Medtronic, Boston Scientific and Abbott. W.-J.N. serves as consultant to InBrain and reports personal fees from Medtronic. A.H. reports lecture fees for Boston Scientific, is a consultant for Modulight.bio, was a consultant for FxNeuromodulation and Abbott in recent years and serves as a co-inventor on a patent granted to Charité University Medicine Berlin that covers multisymptom DBS fibre filtering and an automated DBS parameter suggestion algorithm unrelated to this work (patent LU103178). The remaining authors declare no competing interests. Additional information Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Extended data ECoG electrode localizations are displayed for movement data cohorts (a) Berlin, (b) Beijing, (c) Pittsburgh and (d) Washington. Strongest overall decoding features were theta, low beta and high gamma bandpower. (a) Exemplary power spectra of a single subject without stimulation artifact rejection, and for two artifact rejection methods: PARRM (Period-based Artifact Reconstruction and Removal Method73) and bandstop filtering (100-160 Hz). Both methods can be selected within py_neuromodulation. PARRM requires, however, computation of a filter before online application. (b) Logistic regression performances for stimulation ON/OFF cross-predictions show that the used artifact rejection methods did not improve but deteriorate movement decoding performances. (a) Grid-point interpolation: Individual recording contact locations are estimated in a standardized space. Features are separately computed for each recording contact. Data is then mapped to a pre-defined cortical or subcortical grid in MNI coordinates. This mapping ensures a correct sorting of activity sources stemming from similar brain regions. In this manner, feature vectors are mapped to a common grid defined in space (similar to EEG montages), which then lay the foundation to train models on grid-points instead of recording channels for neural decoding without patient individual training. (b) Connectomic channel selection: An optimal decoding whole-brain connectivity map is computed based on training data. This step requires the computation of contact-specific neural decoding performances and whole-brain connectivity estimates. The connectivity profiles and decoding performances are correlated in a voxel-wise manner to estimate a connectivity map associated with optimal decoding performance. For a test subject, the connectivity map of each channel is spatially correlated with the optimal decoding map and the one with the highest similarity is selected and used for testing of a pre-trained machine learning model. (c) The connectomics-based channel selection approach is further extended by transforming individual channel features using an embedding layer. This layer is computed through contrastive learning and auxiliary variables. Here we used the CEBRA package16. (a) Estimation of a patient-individual “fingerprint”. For each electrode location, the Region of Interest (ROI) is estimated to identify voxels surrounding the location of the recording contact. The connectivity (for example fMRI BOLD correlation) between the ROI voxels to all other voxels is estimated. This correlation brain map is called “fingerprint” and represents the brain-wide connectivity of that recording contact. (b) Construction of the neural decoding connectivity map: Connectivity values of the “fingerprint” profiles are correlated for each voxel with the machine learning based brain signal decoding performances, resulting in a connectivity template associated with optimal decoding performance. (c) For neural decoding of a novel out-of-cohort subject, the connectivity “fingerprint” of each recording contact is retrieved based on its’ MNI coordinates and the contact fingerprint that shows the highest spatial correlation with the connectivity template associated with optimal decoding performance, is then selected for machine learning (d) model prediction without patient-individual training. (a) Functional MRI connectivity and (b) diffusion MRI emotion decoding network map. Functional (a), diffusion weighted structural MRI (b), and fiber filtering connectivity profiles (c) could each significantly predict neutral vs pleasant and unpleasant emotion decoding performances using leave one channel out cross validation. Structural and fiber-filtering connectivity could further predict performances using leave one subject out cross validation. Axial (a), coronal (b) and sagittal (c) planes are shown. Different characteristics of band-pass filtered oscillations or raw-signal can be extracted: peak and troughs amplitudes, prominence of troughs to peaks, intervals between troughs or peaks, sharpness, decay and rise times of identified peaks and troughs, and the 5 ms width of peaks and troughs. Raw time-series including annotated stimulation and clipping artifacts (top) and corresponding FFT features (bottom). The RNS does not allow for simultaneous stimulation and recording. The device parameters allow for specifying a “gain” setting that can omit the clipping artifact. Supplementary information Online movement decoding of a patient with Parkinson’s disease at Charité University Medicine Berlin without patient individual training. The patient performed hand rotation movements using a rotational handle. The video shows on the top left the online feature visualization and decoding. On the top right the Timeflux browser window (https://timeflux.io/) shows the true movement-induced analogue voltage trace (top), movement classifier probability predictions (middle) and binary predictions (bottom). On the top right panel, the raw channel time series is visualized using BrainStreamingLayer. Decoding performance without patient individual training reached a balanced accuracy of 0.71 (0.5 chance level) and movement detection rate of 97%. Movement-triggered subthalamic DBS based on brain signal decoding without patient individual training. A patient with Parkinson’s disease performed hand rotation movements which were decoded by a movement-decoding classifier. py_neuromodulation computed features are visualized on the lower panel in addition to the movement classifier prediction probabilities. When the movement classification probability passed a specified threshold, stimulation was switched on for a duration of 1 s. Overall, stimulation resulted in 0.62 balanced accuracy and a movement stimulation rate with at least 300 ms of 0.91. Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/. About this article Cite this article Merk, T., Köhler, R.M., Brotons, T.M. et al. Invasive neurophysiology and whole brain connectomics for neural decoding in patients with brain implants. Nat. Biomed. Eng 10, 852–869 (2026). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-025-01467-9 - Received: - Accepted: - Published: - Version of record: - Issue date: - DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-025-01467-9