Neuralink co-founder Elon Musk said the first human to be implanted with the company’s brain chip is now able to move a mouse cursor just by thinking. “Progress is good, and the patient seems to have made a full recovery, with no ill effects that we are aware of. Patient is able to move a mouse around the screen by just thinking,” Musk said Monday during an X Spaces event, according to Reuters. Musk’s update came a few weeks after he announced that Neuralink implanted a chip into the human. The previous update was also made on X, the Musk-owned social network formerly named Twitter. Musk reportedly said during yesterday’s chat, “We’re trying to get as many button presses as possible from thinking. So that’s what we’re currently working on is: can you get left mouse, right mouse, mouse down, mouse up… We want to have more than just two buttons.” Neuralink itself doesn’t seem to have issued any statement on the patient’s progress. We contacted the company today and will update this article if we get a response. “Basic ethical standards” not met Neuralink’s method of releasing information was criticized last week by Arthur Caplan, a bioethics professor and head of the Division of Medical Ethics at NYU Grossman School of Medicine, and Jonathan Moreno, a University of Pennsylvania medical ethics professor. “Science by press release, while increasingly common, is not science,” Caplan and Moreno wrote in an essay published by the nonprofit Hastings Center. “When the person paying for a human experiment with a huge financial stake in the outcome is the sole source of information, basic ethical standards have not been met.” Caplan and Moreno acknowledged that Neuralink and Musk seem to be “in the clear” legally: Assuming that some brain-computer interface device was indeed implanted in some patient with severe paralysis by some surgeons somewhere, it would be reasonable to expect some formal reporting about the details of an unprecedented experiment involving a vulnerable person. But unlike drug studies in which there are phases that must be registered in a public database, the Food and Drug Administration does not require reporting of early feasibility studies of devices. From a legal standpoint Musk’s company is in the clear, a fact that surely did not escape the tactical notice of his company’s lawyers. But they argue that opening “the brain of a living human being to insert a device” should have been accompanied with more public detail. There is an ethical obligation “to avoid the risk of giving false hope to countless thousands of people with serious neurological disabilities,” they wrote.