Abstract Neuropsychiatric disorders such as major depression are a leading cause of disability worldwide with standard treatments, including psychotherapy or medication, failing many patients. Deep brain stimulation holds great potential as an alternative therapy for treatment-resistant cases; however, improving the efficacy of stimulation therapy for neuropsychiatric disorders is hindered by the complexity as well as inter-individual and intra-individual variability in symptom manifestations, neural representations and response to therapy. These challenges motivate the development of brain–computer interfaces (BCIs) that can decode the symptom state of a patient from brain activity as feedback to personalize the stimulation therapy in closed loop. Here we review progress on developing BCIs for neuropsychiatric care, focusing on neural biomarkers for decoding symptom states, stimulation site selection and closed-loop stimulation strategies. Moreover, we highlight promising data-driven machine learning and system design approaches and provide a roadmap for realizing these BCIs. Finally, we review current limitations, discuss extensions to other treatment modalities and outline the required scientific and technological advances. These advances can enable next-generation BCIs that provide an alternative therapy for treatment-resistant neuropsychiatric disorders. Similar content being viewed by others Introduction Neuropsychiatric disorders are a leading cause of disability, estimated to afflict up to 970 million people1, and are a major source of economic burden worldwide2. Current treatments, such as psychotherapy or medication, fail a large proportion of patients with these conditions, including 20–30% with major depressive disorder3,4. Moreover, the economic burden for these treatment-resistant patients can be substantially higher, for example, 30–40% higher in the case of major depression5,6. These treatment-resistant cases highlight the need for developing alternative therapies. Deep brain stimulation (DBS) holds great potential for this purpose7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28; however, patient responses have been variable in a number of large studies29,30, probably due to patient heterogeneity31,32,33. Indeed, neuropsychiatric disorders are broadly known to exhibit considerable complexity as well as inter-individual and intra-individual variabilities in their neural representations, symptoms and response to therapy19,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49. Thus, personalization in patient care is an emerging area of investigation for more effective therapies, for which brain–computer interfaces (BCIs) offer a promising solution. BCIs constitute a direct and potentially bidirectional pathway to the brain by recording neural activity and modulating it with inputs, such as sensory or neurostimulation inputs. For example, the recorded neural activity can serve as a feedback signal to personalize the therapy either by providing biomarkers that close the simulation loop or by guiding the DBS target site selection26,27,28,43,44,48,50,51,52,53,54,55. However, developing such a BCI system requires addressing several challenges including quantifying symptom states, identifying their neural biomarkers and decoding them, selecting an effective target stimulation site and designing a stimulation strategy. In this Review, we discuss the developments in BCIs for neuropsychiatric disorders (Fig. 1) and how to address existing challenges. We also highlight the steps and components required to engineer an end-to-end closed-loop BCI system for neuropsychiatric care from a machine learning and system-theoretic perspective (Fig. 1b). A BCI for neuropsychiatric disorders would first record neural activity possibly from multiple relevant cortical and subcortical brain regions (Fig. 1b). Next, it would decode an underlying mental state, such as a depression symptom state, using a neural biomarker computed from this activity. Finally, it would use this decoded state as a feedback signal within a stimulation strategy to adjust the stimulation dose over time and to regulate the symptom state towards a target healthy state. The stimulation strategy might dictate either when or whether to stimulate or how to adjust the stimulation parameters, such as the frequency and amplitude of a biphasic electrical pulse train. To do the above, as its components, a BCI requires identifying the symptom-state biomarkers for decoding, specifying the stimulation target site and designing the stimulation strategy. We describe the progress made on these components and provide a roadmap for their design. To do so, we discuss data-driven computational principles for modelling, decoding and regulating the complex and distributed neural activity patterns associated with mental states, and provide guidelines on their usage. We further discuss how a dynamical systems approach to modelling data could provide a unified framework for designing BCIs for neuropsychiatric disorders. Here, we focus on invasive BCIs for personalized DBS therapy, largely in the context of major depression and obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD). However, the overall BCI framework could be extended to other treatment modalities49,56, such as pharmacological and non-invasive or transcranial interventions. It could also extend to other conditions, including chronic pain54,57,58, eating disorders27,59,60 and post-traumatic stress disorder28,61,62. Symptom-state biomarkers to close the loop A neural biomarker is a transformation on recorded neural activity that is correlated with the symptom state for a particular disorder (Fig. 2). Biomarkers can be used as objective measures with which to decode the current symptom state of the patient from their neural activity. The decoded symptom state can then be used to adjust the appropriate treatment dose in real time, therefore closing the loop on therapy (Fig. 1b). In general, biomarkers can either aim to detect discrete categories of symptom state (such as high versus low mood) or aim to decode the value of a symptom state on a continuum (Fig. 2). Biomarkers could also be either patient specific or generalizable across the patient population (that is, cross-patient). Furthermore, they might incorporate a network of brain regions or be limited to a single brain region. Regardless of these specifics, identifying neural biomarkers is an important component in building closed-loop BCIs and can benefit from data-driven modelling approaches. Biomarker identification requires measuring the neural activity data concurrently with the symptom-state data, typically in a multiday clinical monitoring period (Fig. 1a). These data are then analysed offline to identify a transformation on neural features (that is, a biomarker) that correlates with symptom-state measures26,43,48,51,53. A diverse set of neural correlates in several cortical and subcortical regions have been identified for major depression and OCD symptom states using various data-driven techniques (Table 1). This diversity in the identified biomarkers could have different reasons: first, it might be caused by heterogeneity in implant locations at the level of individual electrode contacts. For example, it is possible that, although the same region is the target of implantation in two patients, the sensing channels might be placed in different functional circuits within the same region, thereby yielding different biomarkers — as suggested for depression and anxiety biomarkers in individuals with Parkinson’s disease63. A second reason could be the heterogeneity of neural representations or symptom states across patients31,35,41,42,43,64, suggesting that personalized biomarkers might hold some advantage for accurate symptom tracking. Third, this diversity probably confirms the evidence from neuroimaging studies that symptom states exhibit distributed network-level representations34,39,45,46,49, an idea that we expand on later. The presence of such network-level representations might imply that multiregional decoding, although not supported by existing implantable devices, holds potential to aggregate more information about symptom states than decoding from a single region43,48,51. Below, we describe the process of data-driven biomarker identification, which includes collecting and modelling symptom-state and neural data. We also review the computational techniques used thus far, and the progress on biomarkers made to date. Behavioural assessment of symptom states Behavioural assessment of symptom states is typically performed using questionnaires, either administered by clinicians or in the form of self-reports. These questionnaires include the Montgomery–Åsberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS)26,50,65,66, the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D/HDRS)19,26,50,53,64,67 and the Immediate Mood Scalar (IMS)21,43,51,68 for depression, and the Yale–Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale (YBOCS)55,64,66,69,70,71 for OCD. These scales have been extensively validated and therefore are helpful tools to assess symptom states. Despite their utility, these measures are usually sparsely available (for example, a few per day)44. Moreover, they can be inconsistent within patients, difficult to compare across patients and not necessarily well correlated with other behavioural measures of mental states because of their subjective nature72,73. Questionnaires that adaptively change their list of questions, such as the Computerized Adaptive Test-Depression Inventory (CAT-DI)48,50,74,75, could instead be used to lower patient burden while improving accuracy and reducing variability in symptom measures. Furthermore, automatic facial and audio affect recognition from video recordings might help to increase the frequency of behavioural assessment and therefore address sparsity70. These audiovisual recognition methods work based on basic facial action units or auditory features that are correlated with affective states, such as the level of frowning or the pitch of voice, respectively76,77,78. Thus, together with standard and newer questionnaires, audiovisual tracking of affective states could enrich behavioural datasets for biomarker identification. Finally, an alternative approach to identifying symptom-based biomarkers is to look for neural signatures of the functional domains that are influenced by neuropsychiatric disorders and assess them using standard behavioural tasks32,79. For example, individuals with OCD and major depression often exhibit impairments in cognitive control80, which can be measured through behavioural tasks such as the multi-source interference task52,81. These measurements can then be used to identify neural features correlated with the assessed behaviour. One possible advantage of this approach is that these biomarkers might measure a transdiagnostic functional domain, as defined by the Research Domain Criteria framework79,82, and therefore might be generalizable across multiple disorders. Neural activity data Extensive evidence from imaging, lesion and electrophysiology studies has revealed that neuropsychiatric conditions are network disorders whose neural correlates can be distributed across multiple cortical and deep brain structures34,35,39,41,43,45,48,49,51,56,83,84,85. For example, corticolimbic regions such as the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), amygdala, hippocampus and cingulate have all been implicated in depression symptom states9,14,19,21,26,43,48,51,86,87. Similarly, dysfunction within the cortico–basal ganglia–thalamo–cortical loop, a neural circuit that is thought to be related to executive function and reward processing, has been implicated in OCD36,37,46,88,89. In addition to involving a network, biomarkers might be heterogeneous across patients depending on the subtype, stage or core symptoms of the disorder31,33,35,41,42,87 or the exact electrode implantation locations63,79,90. Thus, simultaneously recording from multiple distributed brain regions within each patient could be beneficial to identify a personalized neural biomarker. Given that current DBS devices have a limited number of sensing electrode channels and can typically only record from a few regions91,92 (see the ‘Hardware and software’ section), they might not enable such network-level recordings for biomarker identification. To address this limitation, one approach is to identify the biomarker within an in-patient semi-chronic data collection phase before device implantation. This in-patient phase would enable recording multiregional activity in the form of field potentials with semi-chronic intracranial electroencephalogram (iEEG) electrodes including cortical strips and stereo-EEG depth electrodes26,43,48,51,53,93. Patient symptom states can be measured concurrently, such as with self-reports. For example, multi-site semi-chronic recordings collected in this way have identified neural biomarkers of mood states related to depression and anxiety in patients with epilepsy43,51,94, thus achieving personalized decoding of mood variations over time43. Semi-chronic recordings have also been used to identify neural biomarkers in patients with major depression26,48. Once the biomarkers are identified in this in-patient phase, they can guide where the limited number of sensing electrodes should be located in a given patient for chronic symptom-state tracking with neural activity26,93. However, a limitation of the above approach is the invasive nature of implanting several electrodes for monitoring multiregional neural activity. Moreover, it could introduce confounding effects, including the non-naturalistic setting and the short timespan during which symptom states are assessed. Such effects could influence the choice of biomarker and the nature and timescale of the symptom state that it can track44,70. Besides, the biomarker might change over time owing to variations in the disorder stage and other stimulation-induced effects31,35,41,42,95,96,97. Thus, future BCIs might need to tune (that is, refine) neural biomarkers identified during the in-patient phase using longer-term, chronic neural and symptom-state assessment data44,70,98 collected after deployment in more naturalistic settings (Fig. 1c), with and without stimulation. Technologies that enable chronic at-home physiological and behavioural (symptom-state) measurements already exist54,70,99,100,101; for example, mobile or web-based applications enable patients to complete daily self-report questionnaires (for example, using the REDCap platform), which can then be time-synchronized to neural measurements54,70. Although limited in the number of regions from which neural data can be collected, these long-term recordings can be used in combination with adaptive modelling approaches to recalibrate and optimize the biomarkers for chronic care in the future. Furthermore, this data can also inform on the timescales of various neural biomarkers and the long-term effects of DBS treatment95,96 (see the ‘Biomarker timescale considerations’ section). An alternative to having an in-patient phase is to implant the device at brain sites that are known to be related to a given disorder and then either use known biomarkers from previous DBS studies that might be shared across patients or identify patient-specific biomarkers using long-term recordings within those limited sites. This approach has revealed symptom-state biomarkers in chronic pain54, loss-of-control eating27, post-traumatic stress disorder28, depression102 and OCD55,70, as well as a long-term recovery biomarker for binary classification of ‘sick’ versus ‘stable’ response states in response to subcallosal cingulate (SCC) stimulation, which was consistent across multiple individuals with major depression and found using SCC recordings103. However, biomarkers from brain sites selected based on a priori knowledge, without an in-patient monitoring phase, might be hard to optimize owing to the limited number of chronically implanted recording electrodes. Furthermore, such biomarkers might also require tuning to account for changes in the disorder stage or stimulation-induced plasticity over chronic use95,96,97, therefore necessitating adaptive approaches (see the ‘Adaptive methods’ section). Finally, the inherent variability in implantation locations across patients63,79,90, which might be caused by anatomical differences, electrode programming and variability across clinics or surgeons, must be considered. This variability could result in heterogeneity in identified biomarkers and their accuracy across patients. Precision targeting approaches when implanting electrodes could mitigate this variability and enable more accurate and robust biomarker tracking (see the ‘Stimulation site selection’ section). Data-driven biomarker identification Identifying biomarkers for a BCI requires learning models that relate the neural and symptom-state measurements that are collected simultaneously. Biomarker identification typically involves a pre-processing step to compute features from the raw iEEG activity, such as spectral power features or coherences in standard frequency bands (for example, delta, theta, alpha, beta and gamma) (Fig. 2a). These features are then used to identify a biomarker, which is a challenging machine learning problem in which sparse and noisy symptom-state measurements must be related to high-dimensional neural data43,44. The identified biomarker is then used for real-time symptom-state tracking (Fig. 2b). Various data-driven modelling methods might be well suited for addressing this challenge. Linear and logistic regression, along with regularization, is a data-driven modelling approach that has been used to identify biomarkers21,26,48,51,53 (Fig. 2a). For example, linear regression methods have identified that spectral powers in the anterior cingulate cortex48, SCC53 and OFC21, as well as beta coherence between the amygdala and the hippocampus51 correlate with depression severity or mood scales. Furthermore, logistic regression has revealed that gamma amygdala power could serve as a biomarker for k-means clustered depression severity states26 (Fig. 2). Despite their utility, regression techniques do not aim to explicitly learn the temporal structure of neural activity and are largely static methods. Thus, regression might be limited in how much neural information it can aggregate over time for symptom-state decoding. Modelling and aggregating temporal information could be relevant when symptom states are decoded using recordings of continuous neural time-series or neural data segments over time. To aggregate information over time, dynamical system models can be used as a data-driven approach for biomarker identification43 (Fig. 2 and Box 1). These models use the training neural data to learn a latent state-space model that describes the temporal evolution of neural activity in terms of a low-dimensional latent state, therefore also offering dynamical dimensionality reduction. Such dynamical modelling of temporal structure provides two benefits. First, to enable accurate decoding, it can aggregate information about the symptom state over current and past neural features, as opposed to just the current features used in static methods. Second, dynamical dimensionality reduction could reduce overall model complexity and therefore enable training more accurate and robust models for a fixed dataset. In particular, a machine learning method consisting of combined region selection and dynamical system modelling enabled successful decoding of mood variations over time in individual patients with epilepsy43. These mood states were related to depression and anxiety symptoms. The method first identified smaller mood-predictive subnetworks and then modelled their activity in terms of a low-dimensional latent state, therefore performing dynamical dimensionality reduction43,104. The learned latent state was shown to be predictive of mood state in individuals. The trained decoder also revealed that OFC was the most consistent mood-predictive region across patients. Interestingly, other work has shown that OFC stimulation acutely improves mood in individuals with epilepsy with moderate-to-severe depression21. This result, combined with the previous OFC biomarker finding, might suggest that beyond correlations, the OFC biomarker could have a causal link to mood. Finally, in some participants with epilepsy, symptom-state decoding improved when using biomarkers involving more than one region, suggesting the potential benefit of network-level decoding43. Similarly, such latent state-space models were used to decode chronic pain levels from intracranial human recordings54 or to extract cognitive-state variables from behavioural data that can later be correlated to neural features for biomarker identification52,81. Of note, the efficacy of dimensionality reduction methods — whether static or dynamic — depends on the number of available sensing electrodes, their locations and the information measured by each electrode. Furthermore, the efficacy of dynamical modelling depends on the amount of temporal structure and complexity in neural–behavioural data. Unlike static dimensionality reduction methods that only consider spatial (that is, across-electrode) correlations, dynamical modelling considers both spatial and temporal correlations in neural data and therefore can lead to more accurate models. Complex, although unobserved, multiregional interactions can give rise to complex temporal dynamics even in the activity of a few electrodes, therefore still benefiting from dynamical modelling. Another advantage of a dynamical systems approach to biomarker discovery is that the effect of stimulation input can be incorporated within the same model structure105,106 (see the ‘Input-output modelling of neural response’ section). Furthermore, the same approach can support adaptation to track temporal non-stationarities in neural activity over the long-term chronic device use. With these attributes, the dynamical systems approach could enable a unified design framework for decoding and stimulation in neuropsychiatric disorders. Adaptive methods Changes in neural biomarkers of symptom states might be caused by stimulation-induced plasticity95,96,97,107, changes in disease stage35,41,42 or recording instabilities108,109. These changes require recalibrating the biomarker using chronic neural recordings after device implantation. One way to do so would be to refit the biomarker model intermittently and offline based on more recent batches of data. However, this intermittent refitting would only address adaptation on relatively long timescales that depend on the model refitting frequency and can be computationally expensive as the training procedure is repeated each time. An alternative approach to refitting is to develop adaptive methods that update the model parameters gradually over time based on new data. Although largely unexplored within the context of neuropsychiatric care, adaptive methods are an active area of research for robust decoder design with motor BCIs44,110, that is, BCIs that aim to restore motor function by decoding intended movement. Traditionally, most BCI adaptive methods have relied on a supervision behavioural signal such as arm movement, which is either measured or inferred based on task variables44,110. However, supervised adaptation might be difficult in neuropsychiatric applications where frequent behavioural measures of symptom states (such as self-reports) are hard to collect or have slow dynamics that take a long time to observe32,44. Moreover, given the challenge of accurate behavioural monitoring of symptom states, the behavioural supervision might not be sufficiently accurate for adaptation. In these applications, developing unsupervised adaptive methods based on models with latent states might be beneficial because such methods could perform adaptation based on neural data alone without requiring concurrent behavioural measurements of symptom state. There are two broad approaches in unsupervised learning111,112,113,114: the first updates the parameters of a dynamical system model of neural activity directly112,113. Specifically, a recursive, unsupervised subspace identification method has been developed that efficiently updates the parameters of a linear latent state-space model at every timestep based on the current estimate of the parameters and new neural observations. Compared with non-adaptive dynamical modelling, this unsupervised adaptive approach was more successful in predicting multisite, multiday human iEEG activity while using lower-dimensional latent states (that is, achieving additional dimensionality reduction)112. A critical factor in this type of adaptive approach is the learning rate, which dictates how fast the parameter values are updated based on new neural data. Systematic approaches for tuning the learning rate have been developed based on either the speed–accuracy tradeoff during adaptation115 or the model error for neural prediction113. Beyond these parameter adaptation methods, a second approach has also been developed that does not update the model or decoder parameters. Instead, a transformation is learned to align the latent subspaces for the new neural data segment to that learned for a previous data segment111,114. The aligned neural data are then used as input into the same model or decoder. Although not applied to iEEG data or within the neuropsychiatric domain, this approach was successfully used on neuronal spiking activity for motor BCIs, providing robustness to neural instabilities over multiple days111. For adaptive approaches, self-reported and clinician-administered symptom-state questionnaires can be used as ground-truth measures for model evaluation and recalibration. However, such evaluation can have a low temporal resolution as determined by the frequency of symptom-state questionnaires (for example, a few times a day43). Adaptive methods might therefore need to adjust the rate at which model adaptation occurs depending on the evaluation frequency. Integration of mobile device-based ecological momentary assessments, which measure the mental states and behaviours of individuals, could help to acquire more frequent self-reports70,74,75,101. Furthermore, using alternate behavioural or physiological measures of symptom state, such as automatic affect recognition from audiovisual recordings70,76,77,78 or heart-rate variability116, could improve frequency, accuracy and subjectivity. Such behavioural and physiological measures might become more readily accessible through non-invasive wearable devices117 in the future. In general, some level of model adaptation will most likely be needed for future chronic use of BCIs in neuropsychiatric patients. Thus, developing and comparing various adaptive methods for this purpose will be important. Moreover, research on adaptive methods might provide new insights on the nature and timescales of symptom states, as well as their neural encodings and response to DBS. Biomarker timescale considerations A major concern for BCI design is the biomarker timescales and how they can inform treatment strategies. Although still an active area of investigation, the mechanisms of DBS action suggest that different symptoms might manifest responses to treatment at variable timescales95,118. Many biomarkers, so far, have focused on tracking short-timescale symptom states as measured by momentary questionnaires or verbal responses from patients26,43,48,70,75,90. There are several reasons for this choice. First, neurostimulation has been shown to cause acute symptom-state changes in minutes9,11,12,14,17,87,90,118, making short-timescale tracking important. Second, guiding intervention with a short-timescale measure might enable therapies that target high symptom severity states and are aimed at immediate symptom relief, which could be helpful. Third, the short-timescale biomarkers can be used directly for closed-loop real-time stimulation strategies, such as threshold-based on–off approaches or model-based approaches, to enable treatment personalization (see the ‘Stimulation delivery strategies’ section). Fourth, obtaining the data to identify long-timescale biomarkers can be challenging as it requires monitoring neural activity over very long periods of time (months or potentially years), such that enough long-timescale changes are observed for training the biomarker. Nonetheless, it is important to study whether more sustained measures can be used for training biomarkers, in addition to the current short-term symptom-state measures. For example, instead of symptom states, a neural dataset collected over several months has been used to find a long-term recovery biomarker in the SCC for binary classification of ‘sick’ versus ‘stable’ response to SCC stimulation in individuals with depression103. Various local field potential (LFP) features in the SCC including beta, alpha and gamma power band features contributed to this classification across several patients. Although a promising finding, it remains unclear how long-timescale recovery states relate to symptom states, and whether and how a recovery marker can close the loop in a BCI for optimally dosing the stimulation in real time103. More broadly, although some momentary symptom-state measures correlate with longer-term measures of depression and anxiety symptoms68,74 (for example, Immediate Mood Scaler68), whether and how sustained symptom-state or recovery measures are related to short-term symptom-state measures or can be estimated from them need to be investigated. Stimulation site selection Stimulation site selection is essential for overall treatment success. An ideal target site should demonstrate efficacy in regulating symptoms while having minimal side effects. Seminal studies uncovered stimulation sites based on hypotheses driven by neuroimaging and lesion studies. For example, the choice of the SCC, which is one of the most common depression DBS targets, was partly motivated by neuroimaging studies that implicated it in acute sadness and pharmacological treatment effects9,86. Common stimulation sites for OCD treatment — including the ventral capsule/ventral striatum (VC/VS), the anterior limb of the internal capsule and the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis — were also informed by both lesioning studies and observations of improved efficacy119,120. Moreover, during early studies in individuals with OCD, VC/VS DBS also helped to treat comorbid depression, thereby guiding its selection as a potential site for depression treatments14. Interestingly, this observation might hint at common, transdiagnostic distributed networks that are implicated across various neuropsychiatric disorders82. Despite these positive results (Table 2), treatment response in larger studies has shown heterogeneity29,30, which led to the hypothesis that personalized target selection based on structural connectivity, specifically white-matter tracts, could help to account for inter-individual differences in stimulation sites and therefore overall treatment response heterogeneity49,120. One approach for personalized target selection is to use tractography — a brain imaging technique that visualizes white-matter fibre trajectories using diffusion magnetic resonance imaging data — to guide site selection19,36,37,38,40,71,121,122,123. For example, in the first of a series of studies, SCC DBS treatment efficacy depended on the combined stimulation of a collection of white-matter fibre bundles passing through the SCC of individuals with depression38. This finding was tested and validated with tractography maps to locate and target these bundles in each individual19. Similarly for OCD, tractography maps have identified a common structural network connecting cortical (such as the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate) and subcortical (such as the subthalamic nucleus) regions that might be implicated in effective DBS treatments and could explain inter-individual differences in DBS treatment outcomes36,37,46,71,124. The reliability with which connectomic models correlate with versus predict treatment outcomes in OCD has also been investigated, with one study suggesting that these models might not reliably predict outcomes66. Moreover, the structural connectivity and the change in neural activity post-stimulation have been shown to be correlated in individuals with epilepsy125, which suggests that structural measures might predict functional effects. In addition to tractography, volume of tissue activated (VTA) software, such as Lead-DBS126, can guide stimulation site personalization owing to its ability to simulate the regions that will be modulated for a given stimulation and electrode programming setting. VTA can also be combined with tractography to verify white-matter targeting19,127. Together, these results support structural connectivity-based approaches for selecting patient-specific stimulation sites to modulate the networks implicated in a given disorder. Tractography and VTA-based approaches typically focus on localizing electrode placement near well-known targets, such as the SCC. To instead search for targets at the larger scale of multiregional brain networks, various studies have compared stimulation at different brain regions in terms of overall symptom alleviation50,87,128,129,130. For example, stimulating the lateral OFC in patients with epilepsy acutely alleviated mood in those with moderate-to-severe depression symptoms21. Similarly, a comparison of various DBS sites in a patient with depression found that stimulation response was patient-state dependent, with the more effective site being the OFC when the arousal state was high or neutral, and the VC/VS when the arousal state was low87. Overall, this study converged at the VC/VS as the site with the most consistent, sustained and dose-dependent symptom response in their patient, whose primary symptom was anhedonia (reduced ability or inability to experience pleasure). In addition to searching for effective single sites, network-level probing has been used to study single-site versus multisite stimulation. For example, independent and joint subthalamic nucleus and VC/VS stimulation for OCD treatment in a chronic setting reduced OCD symptoms, with evidence that multisite stimulation might provide marginal improvement over single-site stimulation129. Moreover, although individual stimulation of both targets reduced depression severity, only subthalamic nucleus stimulation improved cognitive flexibility129. These results again point to the network-level representation of neuropsychiatric disorders and that stimulation site selection within the network can impact symptom states. Finally, beyond structural connectivity and neuroimaging, functional connectivity measures in at-rest neural activity can also be used to select effective stimulation sites. For example, functional network connectivity can be assessed in at-rest LFP activity before stimulation by fitting dynamical system models to LFP recordings, from which control-theoretic connectivity measures can be calculated106. Such at-rest functional network connectivity measures predicted the strength of response during time-varying stimulation across multiple brain regions in awake macaques106. Thus, although currently not in clinical practice, functional connectivity could provide a complementary approach for identifying candidate stimulation sites that are maximally connected to regions involved in a biomarker and, therefore, are likely to maximally modulate the biomarker during stimulation. Together, developing techniques that can robustly combine the strengths of functional and structural connectivity for personalized site selection is an important future direction of investigation. Stimulation delivery strategies Another critical component in the BCI is the strategy used to deliver the stimulation treatment once electrodes have been placed (Fig. 3). Stimulation strategy dictates when stimulation is delivered and whether or how the parameters of the stimulation waveform are adjusted over time. Optimizing the stimulation dosage is crucial for overall BCI success. Stimulation strategies can differ in whether they are delivered in open loop or closed loop, and whether they are model free or model based — that is, based on a computational model of the response to stimulation. Most stimulation strategies in neuropsychiatric disorders have been open loop and model free (Fig. 3a). Open loop refers to stimulation being delivered continuously at fixed pre-specified parameter levels and can be combined with appropriate site selection to deliver therapy. This strategy was used in early promising DBS studies for major depression and OCD treatment7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18. These paradigms were also model free, in that the stimulation parameters were pre-selected by clinicians during a monitoring phase, without using a formal computational model of their effects on network activity32,44,127. Nonetheless, heterogeneity in treatment response was a challenge in larger studies of open-loop DBS29,30. In addition to personalization of the stimulation site discussed above, another personalization approach is to adopt a closed-loop stimulation strategy. Instead of fixing the parameters at a pre-specified level, closed-loop strategies adjust the stimulation timing or parameters based on real-time feedback of the symptom state, as inferred from neural measurements, therefore delivering treatment based on the time-varying needs of the patient. Closed-loop on–off strategies Closed-loop stimulation strategies in neuropsychiatric disorders have so far focused on an on–off approach26,27,28,52,55. DBS stimulation is turned on (off) when a tracked biomarker of the symptom state crosses a clinically defined threshold (Fig. 3a). Before closed-loop implementation, clinicians first typically try various pre-selected sets of stimulation configurations (such as pulse train frequency and amplitude) on the implanted electrodes and select the configuration that is the most effective in alleviating patient symptoms26,27,87. By trying various configurations, these closed-loop on–off stimulation strategies can be considered model free in how they select the parameters for the on-stimulation phase. The selection can also be made by looking at the effect of various configurations on the neural activity instead of symptom states50. For example, this closed-loop on–off approach has been used in a patient with severe depression based on thresholding an amygdala gamma power biomarker that was identified in the in-patient monitoring phase26. During the outpatient closed-loop deployment phase, improvements in depression symptom severity, as measured by questionnaires, were observed. On–off closed-loop stimulation has also been used to modulate behavioural correlates of mental state, specifically cognitive control within a conflict task (the multi-source interference task)52. Such an on–off approach has also reduced post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms with an amygdala theta biomarker28 and improved self-control in an individual with loss-of-control eating using a delta power biomarker in the nucleus accumbens27. Given this success, it is important to explore the therapeutic benefits of these on–off approaches over open-loop approaches, beyond the ability of the former to use smaller doses of stimulation with potentially fewer side effects98,127. For example, stimulation in a patient with depression revealed that the response to stimulation can depend on the symptom state at the time of stimulation87. This might suggest that, by tailoring the stimulation to the patient’s symptom state, closed-loop strategies could offer additional efficacy benefits compared with open-loop strategies. Moreover, a closed-loop approach might minimize the possibility for loss of efficacy over time, which could be caused by plasticity or adaptation, such as habituation, of neural circuits32,95,96. Future studies in humans that systematically compare open-loop and closed-loop approaches131 will be important in exploring these questions and elucidating the mechanisms of action for DBS therapies. Model-based closed-loop stimulation Beyond the advantages of closed-loop on–off stimulation strategies, developing computational models that characterize the dose–response relationship for stimulation could provide further closed-loop improvements44. These models, also termed input–output models, would characterize the effect of stimulation input on neural activity output and, subsequently, on the underlying symptom state. Data-driven training of such input–output models constitutes a system identification step105,132 that might address multiple challenges. First, given the large number of potential configurations that need to be tried by clinicians, model-free and trial-and-error-based selection of the stimulation parameters is labour and time intensive50,107,127. Furthermore, although narrowing the search space for these configurations around validated values could simplify the process, it could also result in a suboptimal configuration being selected for a given individual. If trained properly and proven successful in modelling the stimulation dose–response relationship, input–output models could circumvent this challenge and generalize to predicting the treatment effect on symptom state or brain activity across a range of untested parameter values, without a trial-and-error approach. These input–output models have shown promise for predicting the neural response to stimulation in animal models as discussed below, but their predictive capabilities in human patients, especially within the context of neuropsychiatric care, need to be tested. Second, on–off stimulation strategies use a fixed parameter configuration, which is selected based on symptom-state responses during a clinical mapping period before the deployment of the implantable device. After deployment, the selected parameter configuration can occasionally be updated in subsequent visits to the clinic. However, symptom-state dynamics within a clinical setting are not necessarily representative of the day-to-day fluctuations of a patient’s symptoms in more naturalistic settings, including the effects of medications42,49,70. Moreover, adaptive mechanisms could change the brain network response as stimulation is applied in closed loop (such as through stimulation-induced plasticity)95,96,97,107. Thus, fixed-dose therapies might result in understimulation or overstimulation, which can either reduce treatment efficacy or cause unwanted side effects, such as hypomania (periods of euphoria or abnormally elevated mood) from VC/VS stimulation33,98. Having an input–output model combined with adaptive approaches that update the model parameters to capture the changes in treatment response over time could help to address this challenge. Third, response to stimulation might be complex and dependent on disease stage or internal states21,35,41,87, such as the arousal level of the patient87. Input–output modelling could help to identify such state dependencies present in complex neural response dynamics. Although these internal states might not be directly observable, their changes can yield detectable changes in neural activity. Thus, these internal states could be identified from neural data through unsupervised learning of an associated set of latent state variables (Boxes 1 and 2) to help address this challenge. Input–output modelling of neural response An input–output model captures the dose–response relationship between stimulation parameters (dose) and neural biomarkers of symptom states (response) (Fig. 3b). Biophysical and data-driven modelling approaches have been used for input–output modelling across different applications, although largely outside the neuropsychiatric domain. Biophysical and biologically inspired models use mathematical formalizations of the biophysical properties of the modelled neural circuit to simulate its activity. As such, these models are typically mechanistic and disease specific — for example, for the cortico–basal ganglia–thalamo–cortical loop in Parkinson’s disease133,134,135. Thus, they can be powerful tools for exploring the mechanism of DBS effect, such as disease-specific population-level effects for Parkinson’s disease133,134,135,136 and epilepsy137,138. Furthermore, biophysical models have been used in numerical simulations to design stimulation patterns136,139 that have also been proven effective for open-loop stimulation, such as in rats and in humans with Parkinson’s disease139. However, given their mechanistic nature, these models have been mainly useful for relatively smaller, disease-specific circuits, and are currently lacking for the large-scale, multiregional networks implicated in neuropsychiatric disorders whose functional organization is not well understood35,46,56,83. Moreover, given their large number of nonlinear model parameters, biophysical models are typically built at the population level and can be difficult to fit to the data of an individual. Thus, despite their mechanistic power, biophysical models might not be easily applicable for developing a personalized BCI for neuropsychiatric disorders. A complementary approach to address the challenge of input–output modelling is to build data-driven input–output models of recorded neural activity, as initially suggested by computer simulations105,140,141. Towards this goal, phenomenological nonlinear models of neural response to stimulation have been developed using data from the rodent somatosensory system as a testbed, focusing on either columnar responses within the somatosensory cortex to thalamic microstimulation142, or individual neuron responses within the thalamus itself to optogenetic stimulation143. However, a BCI for neuropsychiatric care would need to solve the challenge of modelling responses across multiregional brain networks, in each individual, and during time-varying stimulation. To address this challenge, a data-driven machine learning approach learned input–output dynamical system models of large-scale brain network activity during time-varying electrical stimulation105,106. In this strategy, the dynamics of the network response are described in terms of a temporally evolving and input-driven latent state of arbitrary dimension (Box 2). The input–output model is learned from concurrent stimulation and neural response time-series data (input–output data) using system identification techniques such as subspace identification105,132. Doing so, the resulting dynamical model was able to predict multiregional LFP responses to time-varying electrical stimulation in the non-human primate brain106. The success of data-driven modelling is heavily dependent on the data collection approach. To obtain informative input–output datasets, the electrical stimulation input pattern should sufficiently excite the brain network activity while also being clinically safe and charge balanced. To address this challenge, one data-driven approach has used safe, biphasic pulse trains that are currently used in the clinic, but stochastically changed the pulse amplitude and frequency between multiple levels105,106. This strategy results in a multilevel noise-modulated stimulation pulse train that has been proven effective in collecting informative input–output datasets for modelling LFP network responses in awake non-human primates106. Choosing the appropriate input–output model structure is also an important consideration. Among the linear class of models, a dynamical system model could benefit the design of closed-loop BCI systems, similar to its benefits shown across different systems in engineering132,144 (Box 2). This model could capture complex state-dependent (such as arousal-dependent) response dynamics through unsupervised learning of the latent state variable (Boxes 1 and 2). Moreover, it can be used with adaptive methods to track changes in network activity111,112,113,114, such as those caused by long-term stimulation. Besides, a dynamical model uses spatiotemporal correlations to reduce the dimensionality of brain network activity145. More efficient (that is, lower-dimensional) models might also be easier to generalize to modelling of multiregional activity (multi-output) as a function of several stimulation parameters or sites (multi-input). Finally, a dynamical system model naturally lends itself to the design of robust model-based stimulation strategies, which have been extensively used in other engineering applications132,144 (Box 2). For example, a dynamical model structure can describe the effect of optogenetic simulation on neuronal firing rates146. Future in vivo work can test other model structures such as linear transfer functions140, autoregressive models with exogenous inputs141 or linear regression models147. Most of these models, interestingly, can be considered special cases of dynamical system modelling144. Future work can also go beyond linear models and explore nonlinear neural network modelling of input–output effect, with the caveat that any such nonlinear modelling would need to be amenable to closed-loop decoding and control for BCI applications105,148,149 (Box 2). For example, neural network architectures for brain data have been developed that enable flexible and real-time inference149, and incorporating the effect of inputs in such models is an important future direction. Towards model-based closed-loop stimulation Once the input–output model is identified, it can be used within a control strategy to optimize the stimulation parameters in real-time to regulate symptom states44 (Fig. 3c). This can help achieve model-based closed-loop control of these states in future studies. At each time, the controller would first use the observed neural activity and stimulation parameters to decode the current symptom state. The optimal decoding algorithm depends on the input–output model structure; for example, for a linear dynamical system model, the optimal decoder is the recursive Kalman filter105,106,143,146 (Boxes 1 and 2). Once the current state is decoded, it would be used as feedback within the model-based control strategy to determine the optimal stimulation parameters for moving the current decoded state towards a healthy target state. Various control strategies can be used in the future to make decisions on the stimulation parameters, such as the widely used optimal feedback control strategy (Box 2). In this approach, the clinical objective can be quantified within a cost function that is optimized by adjusting the stimulation parameters over time. For example, the objective could be taking the symptom state to a desired (potentially multidimensional) target while using minimal dosage of stimulation. To optimize the objective, the optimal feedback control approach uses the input–output model to predict the effect of stimulation on the decoded state, construct the cost function using this prediction and find the stimulation values that optimize the cost (Fig. 3c). Although still unrealized in vivo for electrical stimulation of large-scale brain networks, there have been advances in model-based control for various neuroscience applications. For example, model-based optimal control was used for in vivo optogenetic regulation of single neurons in the mouse thalamocortical circuit by adjusting the stimulation intensity as input146. Model-based optimal control was also used to control unconsciousness under anaesthesia using EEG in rats150,151,152, and other model-based approaches have been used to facilitate memory in humans153. Moreover, towards building neuropsychiatric BCIs, data-informed numerical simulations have shown promise for model-based optimal control of multiregional network activity using data-fitted input–output models106. Finally, beyond model-based optimal control, future work could explore other control strategies that can be guided by a model, such as proportional-integral140,143 and adaptive minimum variance141 control. These strategies have shown promise in simulations140,141 and for control of single neurons with optogenetics143, but remain to be explored for brain networks and in the context of DBS for neuropsychiatric care. Together, combining input–output models with real-time control strategies in future BCIs could enable robust, individually tailored treatments that regulate network activity to achieve a target symptom state. In future work with animal models and humans, multi-input multi-output control models could be developed by considering multiregional brain networks as outputs and multiple stimulation parameters — such as stimulation frequency, amplitude and site — as inputs. Such models could inform whether jointly adjusting multiple stimulation parameters or simultaneously using multiple stimulation sites is necessary for steering multiregional network activity to a desired target state. This question can be explored using concepts from distributed and multi-input control (Box 2). Finally, building nonlinear input–output models using advances in artificial intelligence (AI) could provide more accurate and robust control154. However, an important constraint that these nonlinear models must satisfy is that they should be amenable to real-time decoding and closed-loop control, which is not the case for many nonlinear neural network models. Towards this goal, AI models for neural population activity that enable flexible and real-time decoding have been developed and can improve the accuracy of decoding149. Extending such models for real-time control is an interesting future direction for BCIs149. Hardware and software Bidirectional implantable neural devices that enable both sensing and stimulation are key elements of BCIs for DBS treatment. Over the years, several devices have been released, including Neuropace’s RNS and Medtronic’s Activa PC+S, Summit RC+S and Percept91,92,155,156,157,158,159. These devices have been particularly successful for closed-loop DBS in motor disorders127 and have shown promise for neuropsychiatric disorders26,27,28,55. However, given the distributed and potentially heterogeneous network-level representations in neuropsychiatric disorders, certain hardware aspects could be improved. These aspects include the number of available channels to record and stimulate from, hardware-enabled stimulation artefact rejection, device power consumption and battery life, and on-device compute power32,98,107,160. Current outpatient devices typically have four or eight contacts per lead that can be used for stimulation. Furthermore, bidirectional devices can use some of the available contacts for sensing (for example, four or six)91,92,99. Some models have higher number of contacts per lead98,127, such as Newronika’s AlphaDBS that has 16-contact leads and 2-channel sensing support161. The current Neuropace’s RNS device and the now-discontinued Medtronic PC+S and RC+S models support multiregional sensing using depth or strip electrodes for subcortical or cortical structures, respectively26,32,63,91,127,130. Multiregional recordings and stimulation have been demonstrated using RC+S devices in patients with Parkinson’s disease99, and with an RNS device in a patient with depression26. Nonetheless, the number of sensing channels available in existing devices limits the number of regions that can be monitored simultaneously, compared with multiregional in-patient monitoring. However, there are several challenges associated with increasing the number of sensing channels or electrodes, such as surgical complexities (for example, the number of implants and risk of inflammation and infection) and technical difficulties (such as energy consumption, handling stimulation artefacts and hardware circuit design for concurrent sensing and stimulation)98,127,160,161,162. The number of sensing channels in future clinical devices as well as efficacy, safety and ethical considerations will impact whether network-level biomarkers can be deployed and what their spatial coverage can be. Another challenge to closed-loop BCIs for DBS is the presence of stimulation artefacts in measured neural activity98,162. Because sensing and stimulation in a BCI might need to happen simultaneously, stimulation artefacts could be present on recording channels and, therefore, confound biomarker tracking162. Although artefact removal using signal processing algorithms, such as template-based subtraction163, can be performed, this can be a difficult task. Hardware-based artefact rejection can have an important role in the future in addressing this challenge because the precise timing of stimulation is known to the hardware device164,165. Battery-life and power consumption are other crucial components of implantable hardware design. Besides being an economic burden on patients, side effects can also manifest after cessation of chronic DBS treatments caused by hardware failure (such as the battery)166. Thus, safe, long-lasting and efficient battery design will be important for future generations of implantable hardware, for example, through the use of rechargeable batteries such as in the Summit RC+S155. Finally, implantable devices need to have sufficient on-device computational power and firmware programming support to enable embedded closed-loop stimulation algorithms beyond the simple methods currently supported (for example, linear discriminant analysis155). Although the learning of models can be offloaded to an external computer by streaming out the data, the real-time decoding and closed-loop control will need to run on-device to enable responsive low-latency treatments. This calls for a coordinated effort for developing next-generation modelling techniques and hardware. Although some models, including deep neural networks, could improve predictive ability, they might not be amenable to real-time implementation, especially on an implantable device with limited computational power. A possible workaround for this limitation, as was demonstrated with the RC+S device, is to run some of the real-time decoding and stimulation algorithms on a peripheral device with more computational power155. Although effective, this method could introduce latency to the system and might be impractical or cumbersome for continuous chronic care. Thus, next-generation computational methods that aim to improve predictive ability should also satisfy real-time and efficient processing constraints149. Similarly, new hardware can tap into advances on neural-network-specific hardware to develop specialized system-on-chip neural devices that can handle online feature extraction and more advanced machine learning models165,167,168. Outlook Neuropsychiatric disorders are a leading cause of disability worldwide with current therapies failing a large proportion of patients. Here we reviewed advances in BCIs for closed-loop direct electrical brain stimulation in neuropsychiatric disorders and provided a roadmap towards their development. Despite much progress, several challenges still need to be addressed. First, identifying neural biomarkers, whether at a network level or within a particular brain region, poses a difficult machine learning problem. Neural representations of symptom states can be nonlinear and might need to be learned based on high-dimensional neural data recordings along with generally sparse and noisy symptom-state measurements. Neural network models can describe nonlinear structure in complex datasets, such as language, and have also been successfully used in neuroscience, largely for modelling and decoding of neural datasets in the context of motor behaviour169. Future neural network and AI architectures and training methods could improve biomarker identification and capture the complexity of multiregional brain networks. Moreover, although the main feedback modality in a BCI will be the neural activity, future BCIs can also tap into physiological measures that relate to mental states to enable better biomarker identification and tracking (Fig. 1). For example, skin conductance170,171, heart rate variability116 and cortisol levels172,173 are known to be linked to mental states, including stress, depression and anxiety174. Furthermore, because most physiological signals can be measured continuously and noninvasively with wearable devices (such as smartwatches), they are well suited to augment both the behavioural and the neural measures of symptom states used for biomarker identification. For example, physiological signals could augment the neural signals in the future to yield multimodal biomarkers with higher accuracy and robustness in symptom-state tracking. They could also be used just in the identification phase of neural biomarkers by augmenting the behavioural measures and therefore providing richer and more frequent symptom-state labels, similar to the use of audiovisual modalities. Towards these goals, developing future devices that enable simultaneous neural–physiological sensing will be important. For example, a backpack platform enabled bidirectional stimulation and multimodal neural–physiological measurements, including intracranial and scalp EEG, heart rate and skin conductance175. Other technologies can also be used for chronic multimodal neural–physiological measurements at home. For example, a joint effort between Medtronic and Rune Labs received the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) clearance to use custom software on the Apple Watch for tracking Parkinson’s disease symptoms100. Similar efforts are ongoing to assess the utility of wearables (such as Apple Watch and Fitbit) and web or mobile applications (such as smartphone-based ecological momentary assessments) for mental health treatments and symptom-state monitoring54,70,101. For example, the Open Mind Initiative is releasing open-source software for implantable neurostimulation, such as patient-facing applications that enable patient-initiated neural recordings70,99 and can be helpful for synchronizing with behavioural measures. Finally, there might be potential in using neural signals beyond the standard spectral LFP power bands, such as spiking-band power176 (300–1,000 Hz spectral activity), spiking activity177 or multimodal spiking–LFP activity178,179,180,181,182,183,184. Given the fast-paced developments of wearable biosensors117 and neural recording devices185, we anticipate that multimodal neural–physiological–behavioural datasets70,175 will be used collectively to enable robust biomarker identification in BCIs in the future (Fig. 2). The ability of neural devices to infer the content of mental states also raises several ethical questions that must be considered when designing and implementing safe and secure BCIs186,187,188. Utmost care should be taken to protect the privacy of brain data collected and potentially transmitted wirelessly from the implantable devices with extra precautions included in hardware and software design155. Furthermore, how patients interact with their devices might influence their perception of self and autonomy, or self-agency186,187. There are also ethical considerations associated with taking an in-patient multiregional (that is, multi-electrode) approach for identifying network-level and patient-specific biomarkers and stimulation targets. Despite the considerable clinical experience in performing similarly invasive multiday procedures in patients with epilepsy to identify seizure-onset zones, there is still some risk of infection and intracranial haemorrhage98,127,160. As such, all attempts should be taken to minimize or eliminate the need for more electrodes than absolutely needed, even if within a short-term in-patient phase and before chronic implantation. For example, studying whether there are commonalities in biomarkers or effective stimulation sites across some patients (as suggested by some conventional DBS studies22,23,103,189) might help to reduce the number of electrodes needed and improve treatment scalability across patients. Translational animal models are also important to understand the neural mechanisms underlying neuropsychiatric disorders88,190 and guiding the development of future BCIs, similar to BCIs for restoring motor function in paralysis. Advances in optical imaging and optogenetics enable simultaneous sensing and perturbation of cells and neural circuits with cell-type specificity in animal models191,192. Causally dissecting neural circuits with optogenetics or microstimulation can inform functional networks. Indeed, the utility of animal models has been demonstrated for symptom-state network activity characterization and neural biomarker identification193,194,195,196,197,198,199, and for stimulation site and strategy testing106,131,200,201. In this Review, we highlighted promising data-driven machine learning and system-theoretic approaches for biomarker identification, stimulation site selection and closed-loop stimulation optimization, and provided a roadmap for realizing model-based closed-loop BCI architectures for neuropsychiatric disorders. Although our focus was on direct or deep electrical brain stimulation, these computational and system design principles for BCIs could also find application for closed-loop administration of other treatment modalities, such as pharmacological or non-invasive stimulation interventions. By personalizing the therapy to the time-varying needs of an individual patient, these BCIs could provide an effective alternative therapy for millions of patients with treatment-resistant neuropsychiatric disorders. References - Ferrari, A. Global, regional, and national burden of 12 mental disorders in 204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet Psychiatry 9, 137–150 (2022). - Whiteford, H. A. et al. Global burden of disease attributable to mental and substance use disorders: findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet 382, 1575–1586 (2013). - Rush, A. J. et al. Acute and longer-term outcomes in depressed outpatients requiring one or several treatment steps: a STAR*D report. Am. J. Psychiatry 163, 1905–1917 (2006). - Mrazek, D. A., Hornberger, J. C., Altar, C. A. & Degtiar, I. A review of the clinical, economic, and societal burden of treatment-resistant depression: 1996–2013. Psychiatr. Serv. 65, 977–987 (2014). - Olchanski, N. et al. The economic burden of treatment-resistant depression. Clin. Ther. 35, 512–522 (2013). - Greenberg, P. E., Fournier, A. A., Sisitsky, T., Pike, C. T. & Kessler, R. C. The economic burden of adults with major depressive disorder in the United States (2005 and 2010). J. Clin. Psychiatry 76, 155–162 (2015). - Nuttin, B., Cosyns, P., Demeulemeester, H., Gybels, J. & Meyerson, B. Electrical stimulation in anterior limbs of internal capsules in patients with obsessive–compulsive disorder. Lancet 354, 1526 (1999). - Fontaine, D. et al. Effect of subthalamic nucleus stimulation on obsessive–compulsive disorder in a patient with Parkinson disease: case report. J. Neurosurg. 100, 1084–1086 (2004). - Mayberg, H. S. et al. Deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression. Neuron 45, 651–660 (2005). - Greenberg, B. D. et al. Three-year outcomes in deep brain stimulation for highly resistant obsessive–compulsive disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology 31, 2384–2393 (2006). - Schlaepfer, T. E. et al. Deep brain stimulation to reward circuitry alleviates anhedonia in refractory major depression. Neuropsychopharmacology 33, 368–377 (2007). - Lozano, A. M. et al. Subcallosal cingulate gyrus deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression. Biol. Psychiatry 64, 461–467 (2008). - Mallet, L. et al. Subthalamic nucleus stimulation in severe obsessive–compulsive disorder. N. Engl. J. Med. 359, 2121–2134 (2008). - Malone, D. A. et al. Deep brain stimulation of the ventral capsule/ventral striatum for treatment-resistant depression. Biol. Psychiatry 65, 267–275 (2009). - Denys, D. et al. Deep brain stimulation of the nucleus accumbens for treatment-refractory obsessive–compulsive disorder. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 67, 1061–1068 (2010). - Sartorius, A. et al. Remission of major depression under deep brain stimulation of the lateral habenula in a therapy-refractory patient. Biol. Psychiatry 67, e9–e11 (2010). - Schlaepfer, T. E., Bewernick, B. H., Kayser, S., Mädler, B. & Coenen, V. A. Rapid effects of deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant major depression. Biol. Psychiatry 73, 1204–1212 (2013). - Luyten, L., Hendrickx, S., Raymaekers, S., Gabriëls, L. & Nuttin, B. Electrical stimulation in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis alleviates severe obsessive–compulsive disorder. Mol. Psychiatry 21, 1272–1280 (2016). - Riva-Posse, P. et al. A connectomic approach for subcallosal cingulate deep brain stimulation surgery: prospective targeting in treatment-resistant depression. Mol. Psychiatry 23, 843–849 (2017). - Fenoy, A. J. et al. A longitudinal study on deep brain stimulation of the medial forebrain bundle for treatment-resistant depression. Transl. Psychiatry 8, 111 (2018). - Rao, V. R. et al. Direct electrical stimulation of lateral orbitofrontal cortex acutely improves mood in individuals with symptoms of depression. Curr. Biol. 28, 3893–3902.e4 (2018). - Crowell, A. L. et al. Long-term outcomes of subcallosal cingulate deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression. Am. J. Psychiatry 176, 949–956 (2019). - Denys, D. et al. Efficacy of deep brain stimulation of the ventral anterior limb of the internal capsule for refractory obsessive–compulsive disorder: a clinical cohort of 70 patients. Am. J. Psychiatry 177, 265–271 (2020). - Graat, I. et al. Long-term outcome of deep brain stimulation of the ventral part of the anterior limb of the internal capsule in a cohort of 50 patients with treatment-refractory obsessive–compulsive disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 90, 714–720 (2021). - Menchón, J. M. et al. A prospective international multi-center study on safety and efficacy of deep brain stimulation for resistant obsessive–compulsive disorder. Mol. Psychiatry 26, 1234–1247 (2021). - Scangos, K. W. et al. Closed-loop neuromodulation in an individual with treatment-resistant depression. Nat. Med. 27, 1696–1700 (2021). - Shivacharan, R. S. et al. Pilot study of responsive nucleus accumbens deep brain stimulation for loss-of-control eating. Nat. Med. 28, 1791–1796 (2022). - Gill, J. L. et al. A pilot study of closed-loop neuromodulation for treatment-resistant post-traumatic stress disorder. Nat. Commun. 14, 2997 (2023). - Dougherty, D. D. et al. A randomized sham-controlled trial of deep brain stimulation of the ventral capsule/ventral striatum for chronic treatment-resistant depression. Biol. Psychiatry 78, 240–248 (2015). - Holtzheimer, P. E. et al. Subcallosal cingulate deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression: a multisite, randomised, sham-controlled trial. Lancet Psychiatry 4, 839–849 (2017). - Widge, A. S. et al. Treating refractory mental illness with closed-loop brain stimulation: progress towards a patient-specific transdiagnostic approach. Exp. Neurol. 287, 461–472 (2017). - Provenza, N. R. et al. The case for adaptive neuromodulation to treat severe intractable mental disorders. Front. Neurosci. 13, 152 (2019). - Figee, M. et al. Deep brain stimulation for depression. Neurotherapeutics 19, 1229–1245 (2022). - Drevets, W. C. Neuroimaging and neuropathological studies of depression: implications for the cognitive-emotional features of mood disorders. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 11, 240–249 (2001). - Williams, L. M. Defining biotypes for depression and anxiety based on large-scale circuit dysfunction: a theoretical review of the evidence and future directions for clinical translation. Depress. Anxiety 34, 9–24 (2017). - Baldermann, J. C. et al. Connectomic deep brain stimulation for obsessive–compulsive disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 90, 678–688 (2021). - Li, N. et al. A unified connectomic target for deep brain stimulation in obsessive–compulsive disorder. Nat. Commun. 11, 3364 (2020). - Riva-Posse, P. et al. Defining critical white matter pathways mediating successful subcallosal cingulate deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression. Biol. Psychiatry 76, 963–969 (2014). - Mulders, P. C., van Eijndhoven, P. F., Schene, A. H., Beckmann, C. F. & Tendolkar, I. Resting-state functional connectivity in major depressive disorder: a review. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 56, 330–344 (2015). - Makris, N. et al. Variability and anatomical specificity of the orbitofrontothalamic fibers of passage in the ventral capsule/ventral striatum (VC/VS): precision care for patient-specific tractography-guided targeting of deep brain stimulation (DBS) in obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD). Brain Imaging Behav. 10, 1054–1067 (2016). - Drysdale, A. T. et al. Resting-state connectivity biomarkers define neurophysiological subtypes of depression. Nat. Med. 23, 28–38 (2017). - Dunlop, B. W. et al. Functional connectivity of the subcallosal cingulate cortex and differential outcomes to treatment with cognitive–behavioral therapy or antidepressant medication for major depressive disorder. Am. J. Psychiatry 174, 533–545 (2017). - Sani, O. G. et al. Mood variations decoded from multi-site intracranial human brain activity. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 954–961 (2018). - Shanechi, M. M. Brain–machine interfaces from motor to mood. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 1554–1564 (2019). - Gray, J. P., Müller, V. I., Eickhoff, S. B. & Fox, P. T. Multimodal abnormalities of brain structure and function in major depressive disorder: a meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies. Am. J. Psychiatry 177, 422–434 (2020). - Bijanki, K. R. et al. Defining functional brain networks underlying obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD) using treatment-induced neuroimaging changes: a systematic review of the literature. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 92, 776–786 (2021). - Kohoutová, L. et al. Individual variability in brain representations of pain. Nat. Neurosci. 25, 749–759 (2022). - Xiao, J. et al. Decoding depression severity from intracranial neural activity. Biol. Psychiatry 94, 445–453 (2023). - Scangos, K. W., State, M. W., Miller, A. H., Baker, J. T. & Williams, L. M. New and emerging approaches to treat psychiatric disorders. Nat. Med. 29, 317–333 (2023). - Sheth, S. A. et al. Deep brain stimulation for depression informed by intracranial recordings. Biol. Psychiatry 92, 246–251 (2022). - Kirkby, L. A. et al. An amygdala–hippocampus subnetwork that encodes variation in human mood. Cell 175, 1688–1700.e14 (2018). - Basu, I. et al. Closed-loop enhancement and neural decoding of cognitive control in humans. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 7, 576–588 (2023). - Sendi, M. S. E. et al. Intraoperative neural signals predict rapid antidepressant effects of deep brain stimulation. Transl. Psychiatry 11, 551 (2021). - Shirvalkar, P. et al. First-in-human prediction of chronic pain state using intracranial neural biomarkers. Nat. Neurosci. 26, 1090–1099 (2023). - Nho, Y.-H. et al. Responsive deep brain stimulation guided by ventral striatal electrophysiology of obsession durably ameliorates compulsion. Neuron 112, 73–83.e4 (2024). - Kupfer, D. J., Frank, E. & Phillips, M. L. Major depressive disorder: new clinical, neurobiological, and treatment perspectives. Lancet 379, 1045–1055 (2012). - Boccard, S. G. J., Pereira, E. A. C. & Aziz, T. Z. Deep brain stimulation for chronic pain. J. Clin. Neurosci. 22, 1537–1543 (2015). - Shirvalkar, P., Veuthey, T. L., Dawes, H. E. & Chang, E. F. Closed-loop deep brain stimulation for refractory chronic pain. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 12, 18 (2018). - Lipsman, N. et al. Deep brain stimulation of the subcallosal cingulate for treatment-refractory anorexia nervosa: 1 year follow-up of an open-label trial. Lancet Psychiatry 4, 285–294 (2017). - Vloo, P. D. et al. Long-term follow-up of deep brain stimulation for anorexia nervosa. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 92, 1135–1136 (2021). - Bina, R. W. & Langevin, J. P. Closed loop deep brain stimulation for PTSD, addiction, and disorders of affective facial interpretation: review and discussion of potential biomarkers and stimulation paradigms. Front. Neurosci. 12, 300 (2018). - Langevin, J.-P. et al. Deep brain stimulation of the basolateral amygdala for treatment-refractory posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 79, e82–e84 (2016). - de Hemptinne, C. et al. Prefrontal physiomarkers of anxiety and depression in Parkinson’s disease. Front. Neurosci. 15, 1337 (2021). - Fridgeirsson, E. A. et al. Patient specific intracranial neural signatures of obsessions and compulsions in the ventral striatum. J. Neural Eng. https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2552/acbee1 (2023). - Montgomery, S. A. & Asberg, M. A new depression scale designed to be sensitive to change. Br. J. Psychiatry J. Ment. Sci. 134, 382–389 (1979). - Widge, A. S. et al. Patient-specific connectomic models correlate with, but do not reliably predict, outcomes in deep brain stimulation for obsessive–compulsive disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology 47, 965–972 (2022). - Hamilton, M. Development of a rating scale for primary depressive illness. Br. J. Soc. Clin. Psychol. 6, 278–296 (1967). - Nahum, M. et al. Immediate Mood Scaler: tracking symptoms of depression and anxiety using a novel mobile mood scale. JMIR MHealth UHealth 5, e44 (2017). - Goodman, W. K. et al. The Yale–Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale: I. development, use, and reliability. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 46, 1006–1011 (1989). - Provenza, N. R. et al. Long-term ecological assessment of intracranial electrophysiology synchronized to behavioral markers in obsessive–compulsive disorder. Nat. Med. 27, 2154–2164 (2021). - Gadot, R. et al. Tractography-based modeling explains treatment outcomes in patients undergoing deep brain stimulation for obsessive–compulsive disorder. Biol. Psychiatry https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2023.01.017 (2023). - Haeffel, G. J. & Howard, G. S. Self-report: psychology’s four-letter word. Am. J. Psychol. 123, 181–188 (2010). - Dang, J., King, K. M. & Inzlicht, M. Why are self-report and behavioral measures weakly correlated? Trends Cogn. Sci. 24, 267–269 (2020). - Gibbons, R. D. et al. Development of a computerized adaptive test for depression. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 69, 1104–1112 (2012). - Sani, S., Busnello, J., Kochanski, R., Cohen, Y. & Gibbons, R. D. High-frequency measurement of depressive severity in a patient treated for severe treatment-resistant depression with deep-brain stimulation. Transl. Psychiatry 7, e1207 (2017). - Ekman, P. & Friesen, W. V. Facial Action Coding System (Consulting Psychologists Press, 1977). - Tao, J. & Tan, T. in Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction (eds Tao, J., Tan, T. & Picard, R. W.) 981–995 (Springer, 2005). - Weninger, F., Wöllmer, M. & Schuller, B. in Emotion Recognition (eds Konar, A. & Chakraborty, A.) 237–267 (John Wiley & Sons, 2015). - Sullivan, C. R. P., Olsen, S. & Widge, A. S. Deep brain stimulation for psychiatric disorders: from focal brain targets to cognitive networks. NeuroImage 225, 117515 (2021). - McTeague, L. M. et al. Identification of common neural circuit disruptions in cognitive control across psychiatric disorders. Am. J. Psychiatry 174, 676–685 (2017). - Yousefi, A. et al. Decoding hidden cognitive states from behavior and physiology using a Bayesian approach. Neural Comput. 31, 1751–1788 (2019). - Cuthbert, B. N. & Insel, T. R. Toward the future of psychiatric diagnosis: the seven pillars of RDoC. BMC Med. 11, 126 (2013). - Etkin, A. & Wager, T. D. Functional neuroimaging of anxiety: a meta-analysis of emotional processing in PTSD, social anxiety disorder, and specific phobia. Am. J. Psychiatry 164, 1476–1488 (2007). - Haber, S. N. et al. Circuits, networks, and neuropsychiatric disease: transitioning from anatomy to imaging. Biol. Psychiatry 87, 318–327 (2020). - Siddiqi, S. H. et al. Brain stimulation and brain lesions converge on common causal circuits in neuropsychiatric disease. Nat. Hum. Behav. 5, 1707–1716 (2021). - Mayberg, H. S. et al. Reciprocal limbic–cortical function and negative mood: converging PET findings in depression and normal sadness. Am. J. Psychiatry 156, 675–682 (1999). - Scangos, K. W., Makhoul, G. S., Sugrue, L. P., Chang, E. F. & Krystal, A. D. State-dependent responses to intracranial brain stimulation in a patient with depression. Nat. Med. 27, 229–231 (2021). - Ahmari, S. E. & Dougherty, D. D. Dissecting OCD circuits: from animal models to targeted treatments. Depress. Anxiety 32, 550–562 (2015). - Fettes, P., Schulze, L. & Downar, J. Cortico–striatal–thalamic loop circuits of the orbitofrontal cortex: promising therapeutic targets in psychiatric illness. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 11, 25 (2017). - Choi, K. S., Riva-Posse, P., Gross, R. E. & Mayberg, H. S. Mapping the ‘depression switch’ during intraoperative testing of subcallosal cingulate deep brain stimulation. JAMA Neurol. 72, 1252–1260 (2015). - Starr, P. A. Totally implantable bidirectional neural prostheses: a flexible platform for innovation in neuromodulation. Front. Neurosci. 12, 619 (2018). - Goyal, A. et al. The development of an implantable deep brain stimulation device with simultaneous chronic electrophysiological recording and stimulation in humans. Biosens. Bioelectron. 176, 112888 (2021). - Allawala, A. et al. A novel framework for network-targeted neuropsychiatric deep brain stimulation. Neurosurgery 89, E116–E120 (2021). - Scangos, K. W. et al. Pilot study of an intracranial electroencephalography biomarker of depressive symptoms in epilepsy. J. Neuropsychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 32, 185–190 (2020). - Herrington, T. M., Cheng, J. J. & Eskandar, E. N. Mechanisms of deep brain stimulation. J. Neurophysiol. 115, 19–38 (2016). - Ashkan, K., Rogers, P., Bergman, H. & Ughratdar, I. Insights into the mechanisms of deep brain stimulation. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 13, 548–554 (2017). - van Hartevelt, T. J. et al. Neural plasticity in human brain connectivity: the effects of long term deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s disease. PLoS ONE 9, e86496 (2014). - Merola, A. et al. New frontiers for deep brain stimulation: directionality, sensing technologies, remote programming, robotic stereotactic assistance, asleep procedures, and connectomics. Front. Neurol. 12, 1149 (2021). - Gilron, R. et al. Long-term wireless streaming of neural recordings for circuit discovery and adaptive stimulation in individuals with Parkinson’s disease. Nat. Biotechnol. 39, 1078–1085 (2021). - Larkin, H. D. Apple Watch Parkinson disease symptom monitor is cleared. JAMA 328, 416 (2022). - Frank, A. C., Li, R., Peterson, B. S. & Narayanan, S. S. Wearable and mobile technologies for the evaluation and treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorder: scoping review. JMIR Ment. Health 10, e45572 (2023). - Veerakumar, A. et al. Field potential 1/f activity in the subcallosal cingulate region as a candidate signal for monitoring deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression. J. Neurophysiol. 122, 1023–1035 (2019). - Alagapan, S. et al. Cingulate dynamics track depression recovery with deep brain stimulation. Nature 622, 130–138 (2023). - Yang, Y., Sani, O. G., Chang, E. F. & Shanechi, M. M. Dynamic network modeling and dimensionality reduction for human ECoG activity. J. Neural Eng. 16, 056014 (2019). - Yang, Y., Connolly, A. T. & Shanechi, M. M. A control-theoretic system identification framework and a real-time closed-loop clinical simulation testbed for electrical brain stimulation. J. Neural Eng. 15, 066007 (2018). - Yang, Y. et al. Modelling and prediction of the dynamic responses of large-scale brain networks during direct electrical stimulation. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 5, 324–345 (2021). - Lozano, A. M. et al. Deep brain stimulation: current challenges and future directions. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 15, 148–160 (2019). - Grill, W. M., Norman, S. E. & Bellamkonda, R. V. Implanted neural interfaces: biochallenges and engineered solutions. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 11, 1–24 (2009). - Downey, J. E., Schwed, N., Chase, S. M., Schwartz, A. B. & Collinger, J. L. Intracortical recording stability in human brain–computer interface users. J. Neural Eng. 15, 046016 (2018). - Shenoy, K. V. & Carmena, J. M. Combining decoder design and neural adaptation in brain–machine interfaces. Neuron 84, 665–680 (2014). - Degenhart, A. D. et al. Stabilization of a brain–computer interface via the alignment of low-dimensional spaces of neural activity. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 4, 672–685 (2020). - Ahmadipour, P., Yang, Y., Chang, E. F. & Shanechi, M. M. Adaptive tracking of human ECoG network dynamics. J. Neural Eng. 18, 016011 (2021). - Yang, Y., Ahmadipour, P. & Shanechi, M. M. Adaptive latent state modeling of brain network dynamics with real-time learning rate optimization. J. Neural Eng. 18, 036013 (2021). - Dabagia, M., Kording, K. P. & Dyer, E. L. Aligning latent representations of neural activity. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 7, 337–343 (2023). - Hsieh, H.-L. & Shanechi, M. M. Optimizing the learning rate for adaptive estimation of neural encoding models. PLoS Comput. Biol. 14, e1006168 (2018). - Harper, R. & Southern, J. A Bayesian deep learning framework for end-to-end prediction of emotion from heartbeat. IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 13, 985–991 (2022). - Kim, J., Campbell, A. S., de Ávila, B. E.-F. & Wang, J. Wearable biosensors for healthcare monitoring. Nat. Biotechnol. 37, 389–406 (2019). - van Westen, M. et al. Optimizing deep brain stimulation parameters in obsessive–compulsive disorder. Neuromodulation 24, 307–315 (2021). - Gadot, R. et al. Efficacy of deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant obsessive–compulsive disorder: systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 93, 1166–1173 (2022). - Sheth, S. A. & Mayberg, H. S. Deep brain stimulation for obsessive–compulsive disorder and depression. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-110122-110434 (2023). - Tsolaki, E., Espinoza, R. & Pouratian, N. Using probabilistic tractography to target the subcallosal cingulate cortex in patients with treatment resistant depression. Psychiatry Res. Neuroimaging 261, 72–74 (2017). - Liebrand, L. C. et al. Individual white matter bundle trajectories are associated with deep brain stimulation response in obsessive–compulsive disorder. Brain Stimulat. 12, 353–360 (2019). - Graat, I. et al. Tractography-based versus anatomical landmark-based targeting in vALIC deep brain stimulation for refractory obsessive–compulsive disorder. Mol. Psychiatry 27, 5206–5212 (2022). - Haber, S. N., Yendiki, A. & Jbabdi, S. Four deep brain stimulation targets for obsessive–compulsive disorder: are they different? Biol. Psychiatry 90, 667–677 (2021). - Stiso, J. et al. White matter network architecture guides direct electrical stimulation through optimal state transitions. Cell Rep. 28, 2554–2566.e7 (2019). - Horn, A. & Kühn, A. A. Lead-DBS: a toolbox for deep brain stimulation electrode localizations and visualizations. NeuroImage 107, 127–135 (2015). - Cagnan, H., Denison, T., McIntyre, C. & Brown, P. Emerging technologies for improved deep brain stimulation. Nat. Biotechnol. 37, 1024–1033 (2019). - Raymaekers, S., Luyten, L., Bervoets, C., Gabriëls, L. & Nuttin, B. Deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant major depressive disorder: a comparison of two targets and long-term follow-up. Transl. Psychiatry 7, e1251 (2017). - Tyagi, H. et al. A randomized trial directly comparing ventral capsule and anteromedial subthalamic nucleus stimulation in obsessive–compulsive disorder: clinical and imaging evidence for dissociable effects. Biol. Psychiatry 85, 726–734 (2019). - Olsen, S. T. et al. Case report of dual-site neurostimulation and chronic recording of cortico–striatal circuitry in a patient with treatment refractory obsessive compulsive disorder. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 14, 569973 (2020). - Wu, H. et al. Local accumbens in vivo imaging during deep brain stimulation reveals a strategy-dependent amelioration of hedonic feeding. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 119, e2109269118 (2022). - Van Overschee, P. & De Moor, B. Subspace Identification for Linear Systems (Springer US, 1996). - McIntyre, C. C. & Hahn, P. J. Network perspectives on the mechanisms of deep brain stimulation. Neurobiol. Dis. 38, 329–337 (2010). - Santaniello, S. et al. Therapeutic mechanisms of high-frequency stimulation in Parkinson’s disease and neural restoration via loop-based reinforcement. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, E586–E595 (2015). - West, T. O. et al. Stimulating at the right time to recover network states in a model of the cortico–basal ganglia–thalamic circuit. PLoS Comput. Biol. 18, e1009887 (2022). - Feng, X. J., Shea-Brown, E., Greenwald, B., Kosut, R. & Rabitz, H. Optimal deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus — a computational study. J. Comput. Neurosci. 23, 265–282 (2007). - Stefanescu, R. A., Shivakeshavan, R. G. & Talathi, S. S. Computational models of epilepsy. Seizure 21, 748–759 (2012). - Sritharan, D. & Sarma, S. V. Fragility in dynamic networks: application to neural networks in the epileptic cortex. Neural Comput. 26, 2294–2327 (2014). - Brocker, D. T. et al. Optimized temporal pattern of brain stimulation designed by computational evolution. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah3532 (2017). - Liu, J., Khalil, H. K. & Oweiss, K. G. Model-based analysis and control of a network of basal ganglia spiking neurons in the normal and parkinsonian states. J. Neural Eng. 8, 045002 (2011). - Santaniello, S., Fiengo, G., Glielmo, L. & Grill, W. M. Closed-loop control of deep brain stimulation: a simulation study. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 19, 15–24 (2011). - Millard, D. C., Wang, Q., Gollnick, C. A. & Stanley, G. B. System identification of the nonlinear dynamics in the thalamocortical circuit in response to patterned thalamic microstimulation in-vivo. J. Neural Eng. 10, 066011 (2013). - Bolus, M. F., Willats, A. A., Whitmire, C. J., Rozell, C. J. & Stanley, G. B. Design strategies for dynamic closed-loop optogenetic neurocontrol in vivo. J. Neural Eng. 15, 026011 (2018). - Ljung, L. System Identification: Theory for the User (Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1986). - Murphy, K. P. Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective (MIT Press, 2013). - Bolus, M. F., Willats, A. A., Rozell, C. J. & Stanley, G. B. State-space optimal feedback control of optogenetically driven neural activity. J. Neural Eng. 18, 036006 (2021). - Basu, I. et al. Consistent linear and non-linear responses to invasive electrical brain stimulation across individuals and primate species with implanted electrodes. Brain Stimulat. 12, 877–892 (2019). - Bertsekas, D. P. Dynamic Programming and Optimal Control (Athena Scientific, 2005). - Abbaspourazad, H., Erturk, E., Pesaran, B. & Shanechi, M. M. Dynamical flexible inference of nonlinear latent factors and structures in neural population activity. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 8, 85–108 (2024). - Shanechi, M. M., Chemali, J. J., Liberman, M., Solt, K. & Brown, E. N. A brain–machine interface for control of medically-induced coma. PLoS Comput. Biol. 9, e1003284 (2013). - Yang, Y. & Shanechi, M. M. An adaptive and generalizable closed-loop system for control of medically induced coma and other states of anesthesia. J. Neural Eng. 13, 66019 (2016). - Yang, Y. et al. Developing a personalized closed-loop controller of medically-induced coma in a rodent model. J. Neural Eng. 16, 036022 (2019). - Hampson, R. E. et al. Developing a hippocampal neural prosthetic to facilitate human memory encoding and recall. J. Neural Eng. 15, 036014 (2018). - Lesort, T., Díaz-Rodríguez, N., Goudou, J.-F. & Filliat, D. State representation learning for control: an overview. Neural Netw. 108, 379–392 (2018). - Kremen, V. et al. Integrating brain implants with local and distributed computing devices: a next generation epilepsy management system. IEEE J. Transl. Eng. Health Med. https://doi.org/10.1109/JTEHM.2018.2869398 (2018). - Rouse, A. G. et al. A chronic generalized bi-directional brain–machine interface. J. Neural Eng. 8, 36018 (2011). - Stanslaski, S. et al. A chronically implantable neural coprocessor for investigating the treatment of neurological disorders. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 12, 1230–1245 (2018). - Sun, F. T. & Morrell, M. J. The RNS system: responsive cortical stimulation for the treatment of refractory partial epilepsy. Expert Rev. Med. Devices 11, 563–572 (2014). - Swann, N. C. et al. Chronic multisite brain recordings from a totally implantable bidirectional neural interface: experience in five patients with Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurosurg. 128, 605–616 (2018). - Krauss, J. K. et al. Technology of deep brain stimulation: current status and future directions. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 17, 75–87 (2021). - Arlotti, M. et al. A new implantable closed-loop clinical neural interface: first application in Parkinson’s disease. Front. Neurosci. 15, 763235 (2021). - Zhou, A., Johnson, B. C. & Muller, R. Toward true closed-loop neuromodulation: artifact-free recording during stimulation. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 50, 119–127 (2018). - Hashimoto, T., Elder, C. M. & Vitek, J. L. A template subtraction method for stimulus artifact removal in high-frequency deep brain stimulation. J. Neurosci. Methods 113, 181–186 (2002). - Rozgic, D. et al. A 0.338 cm3, artifact-free, 64-contact neuromodulation platform for simultaneous stimulation and sensing. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 13, 38–55 (2019). - Zhou, A. et al. A wireless and artefact-free 128-channel neuromodulation device for closed-loop stimulation and recording in non-human primates. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 3, 15–26 (2019). - Kohl, S. et al. Deep brain stimulation for treatment-refractory obsessive compulsive disorder: a systematic review. BMC Psychiatry 14, 214 (2014). - An, H. et al. A power-efficient brain–machine interface system with a sub-mw feature extraction and decoding ASIC demonstrated in nonhuman primates. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 16, 395–408 (2022). - Shoaran, M., Haghi, B. A., Taghavi M., Farivar M. & Emami-Neyestanak A. Energy-efficient classification for resource-constrained biomedical applications. IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Top. Circuits Syst. 8, 693–707 (2018). - Hurwitz, C., Kudryashova, N., Onken, A. & Hennig, M. H. Building population models for large-scale neural recordings: opportunities and pitfalls. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 70, 64–73 (2021). - Sarchiapone, M. et al. The association between electrodermal activity (EDA), depression and suicidal behaviour: a systematic review and narrative synthesis. BMC Psychiatry 18, 22 (2018). - Wickramasuriya, D. S., Amin, Md R. & Faghih, R. T. Skin conductance as a viable alternative for closing the deep brain stimulation loop in neuropsychiatric disorders. Front. Neurosci. 13, 780 (2019). - van Eck, M., Berkhof, H., Nicolson, N. & Sulon, J. The effects of perceived stress, traits, mood states, and stressful daily events on salivary cortisol. Psychosom. Med. 58, 447–458 (1996). - Young, A. H. Cortisol in mood disorders. Stress 7, 205–208 (2004). - Chesnut, M. et al. Stress markers for mental states and biotypes of depression and anxiety: a scoping review and preliminary illustrative analysis. Chronic Stress 5, 24705470211000336 (2021). - Topalovic, U. et al. Wireless programmable recording and stimulation of deep brain activity in freely moving humans. Neuron 108, 322–334.e9 (2020). - Nason, S. R. et al. A low-power band of neuronal spiking activity dominated by local single units improves the performance of brain–machine interfaces. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 4, 973–983 (2020). - Paulk, A. C. et al. Large-scale neural recordings with single neuron resolution using Neuropixels probes in human cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 25, 252–263 (2022). - Hsieh, H. L., Wong, Y. T., Pesaran, B. & Shanechi, M. M. Multiscale modeling and decoding algorithms for spike-field activity. J. Neural Eng. 16, 016018 (2019). - Topalovic, U. et al. A wearable platform for closed-loop stimulation and recording of single-neuron and local field potential activity in freely moving humans. Nat. Neurosci. 26, 517–527 (2023). - Abbaspourazad, H., Choudhury, M., Wong, Y. T., Pesaran, B. & Shanechi, M. M. Multiscale low-dimensional motor cortical state dynamics predict naturalistic reach-and-grasp behavior. Nat. Commun. 12, 607 (2021). - Abbaspourazad, H., Hsieh, H. & Shanechi, M. M. A multiscale dynamical modeling and identification framework for spike-field activity. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 27, 1128–1138 (2019). - Wang, C. & Shanechi, M. M. Estimating multiscale direct causality graphs in neural spike-field networks. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 27, 857–866 (2019). - Sani, O. G., Abbaspourazad, H., Wong, Y. T., Pesaran, B. & Shanechi, M. M. Modeling behaviorally relevant neural dynamics enabled by preferential subspace identification. Nat. Neurosci. 24, 140–149 (2021). - Song, C. Y., Hsieh, H.-L., Pesaran, B. & Shanechi, M. M. Modeling and inference methods for switching regime-dependent dynamical systems with multiscale neural observations. J. Neural Eng. 19, 066019 (2022). - Stangl, M., Maoz, S. L. & Suthana, N. Mobile cognition: imaging the human brain in the ‘real world’. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 24, 347–362 (2023). - Brown, T. et al. Controlling our brains — a case study on the implications of brain–computer interface-triggered deep brain stimulation for essential tremor. Brain Comput. Interfaces 3, 165–170 (2016). - Klein, E. et al. Brain–computer interface-based control of closed-loop brain stimulation: attitudes and ethical considerations. Brain Comput. Interfaces 3, 140–148 (2016). - Yuste, R. et al. Four ethical priorities for neurotechnologies and AI. Nature 551, 159–163 (2017). - Greenberg, B. D. et al. Deep brain stimulation of the ventral internal capsule/ventral striatum for obsessive–compulsive disorder: worldwide experience. Mol. Psychiatry 15, 64–79 (2010). - Hamani, C. & Temel, Y. Deep brain stimulation for psychiatric disease: contributions and validity of animal models. Sci. Transl. Med. 4, 142rv8 (2012). - Deisseroth, K. Optogenetics. Nat. Methods 8, 26–29 (2011). - Machado, T. A., Kauvar, I. V. & Deisseroth, K. Multiregion neuronal activity: the forest and the trees. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 23, 683–704 (2022). - Tye, K. M. et al. Dopamine neurons modulate neural encoding and expression of depression-related behaviour. Nature 493, 537–541 (2013). - Namburi, P. et al. A circuit mechanism for differentiating positive and negative associations. Nature 520, 675–678 (2015). - Calhoon, G. G. & Tye, K. M. Resolving the neural circuits of anxiety. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 1394–1404 (2015). - Janssen, M. L. F. et al. Cortico-subthalamic inputs from the motor, limbic, and associative areas in normal and dopamine-depleted rats are not fully segregated. Brain Struct. Funct. 222, 2473–2485 (2017). - Hultman, R. et al. Brain-wide electrical spatiotemporal dynamics encode depression vulnerability. Cell 173, 166–180.e14 (2018). - Mague, S. D. et al. Brain-wide electrical dynamics encode individual appetitive social behavior. Neuron 110, 1728–1741.e7 (2022). - Wu, H. et al. Closing the loop on impulsivity via nucleus accumbens delta-band activity in mice and man. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, 192–197 (2018). - Hamani, C. et al. Deep brain stimulation reverses anhedonic-like behavior in a chronic model of depression: role of serotonin and brain derived neurotrophic factor. Biol. Psychiatry 71, 30–35 (2012). - Lim, L. W. et al. Electrical stimulation alleviates depressive-like behaviors of rats: investigation of brain targets and potential mechanisms. Transl. Psychiatry 5, e535 (2015). - Rappel, P. et al. Subthalamic theta activity: a novel human subcortical biomarker for obsessive compulsive disorder. Transl. Psychiatry 8, 118 (2018). - Miller, K. J., Prieto, T., Williams, N. R. & Halpern, C. H. Case studies in neuroscience: the electrophysiology of a human obsession in nucleus accumbens. J. Neurophysiol. 121, 2336–2340 (2019). - Ramasubbu, R., Anderson, S., Haffenden, A., Chavda, S. & Kiss, Z. H. T. Double-blind optimization of subcallosal cingulate deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression: a pilot study. J. Psychiatry Neurosci. 38, 325–332 (2013). - Zhang, C. et al. Bilateral habenula deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression: clinical findings and electrophysiological features. Transl. Psychiatry 12, 52 (2022). - Fenoy, A. J. et al. Deep brain stimulation of the medial forebrain bundle: distinctive responses in resistant depression. J. Affect. Disord. 203, 143–151 (2016). - Coenen, V. A. et al. Superolateral medial forebrain bundle deep brain stimulation in major depression: a gateway trial. Neuropsychopharmacology 44, 1224–1232 (2019). - Gálvez, J. F. et al. The medial forebrain bundle as a deep brain stimulation target for treatment resistant depression: a review of published data. Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 58, 59–70 (2015). - Goodman, W. K. et al. Deep brain stimulation for intractable obsessive compulsive disorder: pilot study using a blinded, staggered-onset design. Biol. Psychiatry 67, 535–542 (2010). - Bewernick, B. H., Kayser, S., Sturm, V. & Schlaepfer, T. E. Long-term effects of nucleus accumbens deep brain stimulation in treatment-resistant depression: evidence for sustained efficacy. Neuropsychopharmacology 37, 1975–1985 (2012). - Barcia, J. A. et al. Personalized striatal targets for deep brain stimulation in obsessive–compulsive disorder. Brain Stimulat. 12, 724–734 (2019). - Bergfeld, I. O. et al. Deep brain stimulation of the ventral anterior limb of the internal capsule for treatment-resistant depression: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry 73, 456–464 (2016). - Abelson, J. L. et al. Deep brain stimulation for refractory obsessive–compulsive disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 57, 510–516 (2005). - Mosley, P. E. et al. A randomised, double-blind, sham-controlled trial of deep brain stimulation of the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis for treatment-resistant obsessive–compulsive disorder. Transl. Psychiatry 11, 190 (2021). - Jiménez, F. et al. A patient with a resistant major depression disorder treated with deep brain stimulation in the inferior thalamic peduncle. Neurosurgery 57, 585–593 (2005). - Jiménez, F. et al. Neuromodulation of the inferior thalamic peduncle for major depression and obsessive compulsive disorder. Acta Neurochir. Suppl. 97, 393–398 (2007). - Roweis, S. & Ghahramani, Z. A unifying review of linear Gaussian models. Neural Comput. 11, 305–345 (1999). - Cunningham, J. P. & Yu, B. M. Dimensionality reduction for large-scale neural recordings. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 1500–1509 (2014). - Vyas, S., Golub, M. D., Sussillo, D. & Shenoy, K. V. Computation through neural population dynamics. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 43, 249–275 (2020). - Vahidi, P., Sani, O. G. & Shanechi, M. M. Modeling and dissociation of intrinsic and input-driven neural population dynamics underlying behavior. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 121, e2212887121 (2024). - Camacho, E. F. & Bordons, C. Model Predictive Control (Springer, 2007). - Nozari, E. et al. Macroscopic resting-state brain dynamics are best described by linear models. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 8, 68–84 (2024). Acknowledgements The authors thank H. C. Jo, O. G. Sani, T. Jani and N. Sadras in the Shanechi laboratory for helpful feedback. This work was partly supported by the US National Institutes of Health grants R01MH123770 and R61MH135407, the One Mind Rising Star Award, and the Foundation for OCD Research. Ethics declarations Competing interests M.M.S. is an inventor on University of Southern California’s patents or patent applications related to decoding and closed-loop control approaches, and is a consultant for Paradromics Inc. L.L.O. declares no competing interests. Peer review Peer review information Nature Reviews Bioengineering thanks David Borton, Andreas Horn and Jean-Philippe Langevin for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Additional information Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Rights and permissions Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law. About this article Cite this article Oganesian, L.L., Shanechi, M.M. Brain–computer interfaces for neuropsychiatric disorders. Nat Rev Bioeng 2, 653–670 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1038/s44222-024-00177-2 - Accepted: - Published: - Version of record: - Issue date: - DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s44222-024-00177-2